                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    MIMICKING FINANCE

                                         Lauren Cohen
                                          Yiwen Lu
                                        Quoc H. Nguyen

                                       Working Paper 34849
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w34849


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2026

We would like to thank Suman Banerjee, Stefano Bonini, Brigham Brau, William Cong, Patricia
Dechow, Winston Wei Dou, Cameron Ellis, Paul Gao, Jon Garfinkel, Itay Goldstein, David
Hirshleifer, Gerard Hoberg, John Hund, Byoung-Hyoun Hwang, Zoran Ivkovich, Ron Kaniel, Scott
Kominers, Seokwoo J. Lee, Bradford Levy, Erik Lie, Claudia Moise, Sean Myers, Anna Pavlova,
Carmen Payne-Mann, Lin Peng, Tarun Ramadorai, Jonathan Reuter, Alberto Rossi, Denis
Schweizer, Devin Shanthikumar, Richard Sloan, Jonathan Sokobin, Chester S. Spatt, Jess Stauth,
Lorien Stice-Lawrence, Siew Hong Teoh, Jose Tribo, Wei Xiong, Jiajie Xu, Mao Ye, Yao Zeng,
and Miao Ben Zhang for their valuable comments and suggestions. We also thank seminar
participants at the University of Iowa, Harvard University, NBS at NTU, the UGA Fall Finance
Conference, the Conference on Emerging Technologies in Accounting and Financial Economics
(CETAFE) Conference, the 35th Conference on Financial Economics and Accounting (CFEA), the
2025 Society of Quantitative Analysts Boston Conference, the Behavioral Finance Working Group
Conference, Behavioural Finance Working Group (BFWG), NBER Big Data, Artificial
Intelligence, and Financial Economics conference, 6th RCF-ECGI Corporate Finance and
Governance Conference, CUHK-RAPS-RCFS Conference on Asset Pricing and Corporate
Finance, SQA Conference, and the AI in Finance Conference. All remaining errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2026 by Lauren Cohen, Yiwen Lu, and Quoc H. Nguyen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Mimicking Finance
Lauren Cohen, Yiwen Lu, and Quoc H. Nguyen
NBER Working Paper No. 34849
February 2026
JEL No. C45, C53, C55, C82, G11, G23

                                           ABSTRACT

We use frontier advancements in Artificial Intelligence and machine learning to extract and classify
the part of key economic agents’ behaviors that are predictable from past behaviors. Even the
agents themselves might view these as novel (innovative) decisions; however, we show in strong
contrast that a large percentage of these actions and behaviors can be predicted—and thus
mimicked—in the absence of these individuals. In particular, we show that 71% of mutual fund
managers’ trade directions can be predicted in the absence of the agent making a single trade. For
some managers, this increases to nearly all of their trades in a given quarter. Further, we find that
manager behavior is more predictable and replicable for managers who have a longer history of
trading and are in less competitive categories. The larger the ownership stake of the manager in the
fund, the less predictable their behavior. Lastly, we show strong performance implications: less
predictable managers strongly outperform their peers, while the most predictable managers
significantly underperform. Even within each manager's portfolio, those stock positions that are
more difficult to predict strongly outperform those that are easier to predict. Aggregating across the
universe of fund managers each quarter, stocks whose position changes are least predictable
additionally significantly outperform stocks whose position changes are most predictable across the
universe. Our framework allows researchers to delineate and classify the portion of financial
agents’ action sets which are predictable from those which are novel responses to stimuli -- open to
being evaluated for value creation or destruction.

Lauren Cohen                                      Quoc H. Nguyen
Harvard University                                DePaul University
Harvard Business School                           qnguye14@depaul.edu
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu

Yiwen Lu
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School
yiwelu@wharton.upenn.edu
1     Introduction

Agents should not be compensated for aspects of their behavior and human capital that can be
replicated in a low-cost way. Thus, equilibrium wages, hiring, and job tenure should be substan-
tively affected by advances in technology and replicable skill acquisition. We explore this in the
54 trillion-dollar market of U.S. asset management.1 In particular, we focus on the actions and
behaviors of asset managers that are predictable given their past behaviors and observable fund,
firm, and market conditions. Although much of the previous literature has focused on returns
produced by asset managers within this space, we explore this first principle of trading behavior
and relate it to realizations (including performance).

    We are the first to explore the fundamental aspects of financial agent behavior that can be
learned and repeated given advances in technology, and thus should now have a lower equilib-
rium price. In particular, we train simple, straightforward models to mimic asset manager be-
havior at the fund level. We find that a large percentage of the trading behavior of managers can
be predicted and mimicked. In particular, 71% of portfolio managers’ trades on average can be
predicted in a given quarter given their past trading history. Given that this trading is a central
component of the asset managers’ profession, this represents an important impact of technolog-
ical advancement that asset management labor supply and demand must confront.

    We explore this in further detail to understand the cross-sectional and time-series of mimick-
ing ability of the fund management universe. Namely, using data from 1990 to 2023, we find
a number of empirical regularities regarding the precision with which we are able to predict as-
set manager trading behavior in the active equity fund manager universe. First, as mentioned
above, using only basic and streamlined AI models, we are able to predict 71% of the (buy, sell,
and hold) decisions of active equity fund managers each quarter. This predictability is relatively
stable across the sample period, and significantly larger than that of a baseline max frequency
    1 Office of Financial Research, Annual Report 2024 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Treasury, 2024).




                                                                           1
(also termed a Majority Class or Zero Rule Classifier) model (p < 0.0001). Further, when we
explore this predictability of fund manager behavior across styles, we find that while large and
stable across categories, it peaks for Mid-cap Blend funds at 75% predictability, on average.

   Turning to fund-manager characteristics’ relations to trading predictability, we find that a
number of these characteristics is significantly related. In particular, we find that seasoned man-
agers (longer tenures) are significantly easier to predict the trading of. Further, managers who
manage many funds, along with those who manage across multiple strategies, have on average
significantly higher trading predictability. This could be due, for instance, to constraints on time
resulting in standardization or commonalities of strategies that are easier for the model to cap-
ture. In addition, managerial ownership in the fund was significantly related to predictability.
Namely, the higher the ownership stake of managers in the fund itself, the less predictable their
trading behavior.

   We also explore a number of fund-specific characteristics. Similar to manager-level tenure,
we find that older funds have a significantly higher predictability of trading. In contrast, com-
petition, both at the category-level and within fund-family, appears to reduce trading behavior
predictability. The more competition faced by managers, the more dynamic and unpredictable
strategies they appear to implement. Further, larger fund management teams also exhibit trading
behavior that is less predictable on average. With regard to fund size and trading activities them-
selves, we find that: larger funds, those with higher portfolio turnover, higher levels of investor
inflows, and higher management fees, all exhibit trading behavior that is more variable and less
predictable.

   We then move on to explore the characteristics of the underlying securities themselves that
might be related to the predictability of fund-manager trading behavior in them. First, we find
that portfolio position rank of a security has a large and significant relation with predictability.
Specifically, firms that are larger relative positions (e.g., the top 5 held positions in a managers’
portfolio) exhibit more dynamic variation in trading, and are less predictable relative to lower



                                                 2
ranked positions. Further, in terms of firm-level characteristics: value firms, firms with higher
free cash flow, high payout ratios, and low asset turnover ratios all are easier to predict the trading
of. This could be consistent with those firms that pursue more stable and easy-to-predict firm-
level operating strategies. In contrast, growth, high R&D, and high earnings-surprise firms all
have trading behavior surrounding them that is more difficult to predict.

   Lastly, we examine the potential performance implications of a fund-manager having more (or
less) predictable quarterly trading behavior. We find evidence of a strong and significant relation-
ship. Namely, peer outperformance is nearly monotonic across trading predictability. Managers
whose trading is the least predictable significantly outperform their peers, while those whose trad-
ing is most predictable significantly underperform their peers. This performance gap appears in
the first quarter following trading, and continues to accrue for four quarters following trading,
resulting in a significant cumulative performance gap of 0.79% (t = 3.05), unaffected by controls
for known risk determinants.

   This outperformance is concentrated in the securities that are least predictable, both within-
and across-fund managers. When aggregating across managers, stocks in which the behavior of
fund managers is least predictable strongly outperform stocks in which the behavior of fund man-
agers are most predictable. The long-short (Q1–Q5) difference between the two generate an av-
erage annualized return of 424 basis points (t = 5.74) in the next quarter. Moreover, across all
quintile portfolios, the returns are monotonically decreasing in the predictability of fund man-
ager behavior in the security. Again, adjusting these returns for known risk-determinants has
nearly no effect on these spreads, resulting in alphas of essentially the same magnitude and sig-
nificance. Moreover, these returns are large and significant throughout the entire sample period,
and if anything are larger in point-estimate in the most recent period through present-day.

   Our paper relates to several emerging literatures. First, this paper contributes to the emerging
literature that applies artificial intelligence and machine learning methods to core questions in
finance. Cohen et al. (2020) use natural language processing to quantify similarities in corporate



                                                  3
filings and show that these measures have strong implications for firms’ future returns. Gu et al.
(2020) demonstrate that machine learning methods improve predictive accuracy in estimating
risk premia by flexibly capturing nonlinearities and high-dimensional interactions. Related work
applies machine learning to enhance return prediction and portfolio performance (Freyberger
et al. 2020; Kelly et al. 2019; Gu et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2024; Jensen et al. 2023; De Haan et al.
2025).

   Our paper is also connected to studies that predict fund performance by exploiting fund and
stock characteristics (Kaniel et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2021; DeMiguel et al. 2023). In contrast to this
literature, we focus on predicting funds’ trading directions and, more importantly, on evaluating
whether an AI agent can systematically mimic the behavior of real-world asset managers.

   This paper relates to two strands of research in portfolio management. The first examines
whether mutual fund managers possess stock-picking ability, with mixed evidence: some stud-
ies find that active managers fail to outperform passive benchmarks once risk and costs are ac-
counted for (Jensen 1968; Malkiel 1995; Carhart 1997), while others show that managers’ trades
or stock selections generate positive abnormal returns when evaluated using holdings-based or
characteristics-based measures (Grinblatt and Titman 1989, 1993; Daniel et al. 1997; Wermers
1997). More recent work develops sharper tests of managerial skill, showing that managers un-
dertake unobserved actions such as liquidity management that are not captured by standard mea-
sures (Kacperczyk et al. 2008), that the degree of active share predicts future performance (Cre-
mers and Petajisto 2009), and that skilled managers create significant value when measured in
dollar terms even if percentage-based alphas are small (Berk and Van Binsbergen 2015). Related
studies emphasize determinants of fund performance more broadly, finding that funds focusing
on specific industries outperform more diversified peers (Kacperczyk et al. 2007) and that flow-
driven incentives shape the extent to which managers generate alpha (Guercio and Reuter 2014).
A newer strand applies machine learning to portfolio management by capturing the latent struc-
ture of securities. For example, Gabaix et al. (2024) estimate asset embeddings from institutional
holdings using deep sequence models, predicting the placement of assets within an investor’s or-

                                                 4
dered portfolio. Gabaix et al. (2025) apply firm embeddings derived from U.S. corporate bond
holdings to extract high-dimensional representations of information used in portfolio choice,
showing that these embeddings explain both the variation and the volatility of credit spreads. Our
contribution bridges this literature by showing that machine learning can systematically mimic
aspects of active investing, shedding light on the fundamental value added by active managers.

   Finally, we also contribute to the burgeoning literature in labor economics that explores what
tasks are most susceptible to innovation, and the resultant relative price and value changes across
the labor force. Seminal work by Autor et al. (2003) shows that computerization substitutes for
routine tasks while complementing non-routine analytic and interactive activities. Subsequent
research documents the effects of technology for labor markets, including wage and employment
polarization (Goos and Manning 2007; Autor and Dorn 2013; Michaels et al. 2014), aggregate em-
ployment (Autor et al. 2015; Acemoglu and Restrepo 2020), and firms’ evolving demand for work
skills (Bartel et al. 2007). More recent studies focus on the adoption of generative AI, showing
how these tools reshape productivity and task allocation in specific occupations (Peng et al. 2023;
Noy and Zhang 2023; Choi and Schwarcz 2024; Dell’Acqua et al. 2023; Walther and Dutordoir
2025). Brynjolfsson et al. (2025) find that generative AI raises productivity while compressing
performance gaps across workers. Our paper extends this task-based perspective to finance by
focusing on financial agents, providing empirical evidence on the fund and stock characteristics
that are most susceptible to prediction and, hence, most exposed to displacement by AI.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines a theoretical frame-
work for the asset management setting both pre- and post-AI introduction. Section 3 provides
an overview of the AI-ML model we use, along with the data construction, variables, and em-
pirical design. Section 4 provides summary statistics of the fund-, manager-, and firm-level data
used. Section 5 examines the main predictability of fund-manager trading behavior, along with
its dynamics across time and fund-categories. Section 6 explores the variation in trading behavior
predictability across fund-, manager-, and firm-level characteristics, while Section 7 examines the
fund performance of more and less predictable managers. Section 8 concludes.

                                                 5
2      Theoretical Framework

2.1     Model Setting

Combining Spence (1981) and Autor et al. (2003), we model mutual fund managers performing
two types of tasks: routine tasks R and non-routine tasks N . Routine tasks are those predictable
from our AI model. Non-routine tasks are those unpredictable by AI model.

      Fund alpha is produced using a CES aggregator:

                                                     1/ρ
                     α = A [aRρ + (1 − a)N ρ ]             , a ∈ (0, 1), 0 < ρ < 1,             (1)

where a is the weight on routine tasks , ρ determines the elasticity of substitution σ = 1−ρ
                                                                                          1
                                                                                             ,
and A is total factor productivity. Managers choose non-routine effort e ≥ 0, which maps to
non-routine input as
                                              N = θtN e,                                        (2)

where t ∈ {L, H} indexes low- and high-skill managers, and θtN is type-dependent non-routine
productivity. The cost of non-routine effort is

                                              e
                                   Ct (e) =      ,          zH > zL ,                           (3)
                                              zt

so high-type managers can produce non-routine output more efficiently. Routine tasks are scal-
able and relatively inexpensive, but entail a small convex cost that limits total activity. Markets
are competitive and wages are determined by investor beliefs about expected alpha conditional
on observable information.


2.2      Information Structure

Pre-AI Regime. Before AI-based decomposition, investors observe only total trading activity

                                          T = R + N,                                           (4)

                                                     6
and cannot distinguish between routine and non-routine tasks. Compensation is therefore based
on expected alpha conditional on total activity,

                                       w(T ) = E[α | T ].


   Because routine and non-routine tasks enter the observable signal additively, they are perfect
substitutes from a signaling perspective.

   Post-AI Regime. After the introduction of an AI model trained on historical trading data,
routine trading becomes predictable to investors. Let

                                            R̂ = r̂(Xt−1 ),                                    (5)

denote predicted routine trading based on past information. Investors therefore observe the resid-
ual,
                                     Ñ = T − R̂ = θtN e,                                     (6)

which isolates the non-routine component of trading activity. As a result, routine tasks no longer
affect investor beliefs or compensation.

   Once AI removes the signaling value of routine activity, we treat routine input R as fixed at a
baseline level. This captures the idea that routine tasks are performed mechanically and do not
convey information about managerial skill in the post-AI regime. Fix R and define

                             C0 = aRρ ,          kt = (1 − a)(θtN )ρ .


   Alpha can then be written as

                                                              1/ρ
                                  αt (e) = A [C0 + kt eρ ]          .                          (7)




                                                   7
   Manager t chooses non-routine effort e to maximize

                                                         e
                                         Ut = αt (e) −      .                                    (8)
                                                         zt


2.3   Equilibrium Before and After AI

In the pre-AI regime, managers choose routine activity and non-routine effort subject to their
respective costs, while compensation depends only on total activity.

Proposition 1 (Pooling Equilibrium Pre-AI). In the pre-AI regime, equilibrium features pooling
across types. Both high- and low-skill managers choose the same total activity level T ∗ , achieved
primarily through routine tasks, while non-routine effort is low and does not separate types.

Proof. Because investors observe only total activity, routine and non-routine tasks are equivalent
as signals of skill. Routine tasks are cheaper to scale at the margin, allowing low-skill managers to
mimic high-skill managers by expanding routine activity. Anticipating such mimicry, high-skill
managers do not find it profitable to separate through costly non-routine effort. The equilibrium
therefore features excessive routine activity and under-provision of non-routine effort.

   With AI-based decomposition, investors observe non-routine output Ñ = θtN e, and routine
activity no longer affects compensation. Each manager chooses e to solve

                                                         1/ρ       e
                                  max A [C0 + kt eρ ]          −      .
                                   e≥0                             zt

   The first-order condition is

                                                         1−ρ        1
                                  Akt eρ−1 [C0 + kt eρ ] ρ =           .                         (9)
                                                                    zt




                                                 8
   Let X = C0 + kt eρ . Solving (9) yields

                                                         C0
                                    Xt∗ =                              ρ ,
                                                                      ρ−1
                                                          1
                                              1−          1/ρ
                                                        Akt     zt


and optimal effort is
                                                                1/ρ
                                                  Xt∗ − C0
                                              
                                      e∗t =                             .                       (10)
                                                      kt
Proposition 2 (Separating Equilibrium Post-AI). After AI-based decomposition, equilibrium is
separating, with
                                              e∗H > e∗L .

Proof. From (10), e∗t is increasing in both kt = (1 − a)(θtN )ρ and zt . Because the high type
satisfies θH
           N
             > θLN and zH > zL , we obtain e∗H > e∗L .

   High-skill managers exert greater non-routine effort because they are both more productive
and face lower marginal costs. Low-skill managers cannot profitably mimic this behavior, and
non-routine output fully reveals type.

   In equilibrium, wages equal realized alpha,

                             wt∗ = A(Xt∗ )1/ρ , implying wH
                                                          ∗
                                                            > wL∗ .


   The model has several implications. Managers with higher skill exert more non-routine effort,
making their trading behavior less predictable by AI models and generating higher alpha. AI
sharpens skill revelation by stripping routine activity of its signaling value: before AI, low-skill
managers pool with high-skill managers through routine trading, whereas after AI, compensa-
tion depends on costly non-routine output, leading to separation. This mechanism increases
cross-sectional dispersion in performance and compensation. Finally, AI induces a reallocation
of managerial effort away from routine execution and toward judgment-intensive, non-routine
activities such as interpretation, strategic analysis, and complex decision-making.


                                                    9
      In Appendix B, we examine fund level characteristics, manager level characteristics and com-
petitive dynamics, along with their predictions for non-routine tasks. Further, we explore exten-
sions with heterogenous investor types along with potential welfare dynamics surrounding the
introduction of AI.


3      AI-ML Model and Data

3.1     Data and Sample Construction

Our analysis draws on a combination of fund- and security-level datasets assembled from mul-
tiple sources. We begin by constructing a panel of mutual fund equity holdings from Morn-
ingstar Direct, which provides comprehensive fund-security-level holdings (shares) and market
value collected from SEC N-30D, N-CSR, N-Q, N-PORT filings, and fund prospectuses. These
holdings are reported at either a quarterly or semiannual frequency, depending on the regulatory
filing behavior of each fund. We restrict attention to actively managed U.S. equity mutual funds,
excluding index, sector-specific, balanced, and international funds. The sample period spans 1990
to 2023.

      We collect fund characteristics from both Morningstar and the CRSP Mutual Fund Database.
The Morningstar data include metadata on fund inception dates, investment category, and man-
ager information. We use the share-level characteristic from the oldest share of each fund. How-
ever, as some fund characteristics in Morningstar are only available for the most recent date, we
complement it with CRSP, which provides monthly data on total net assets (TNA), fund re-
turns, expense ratios, turnover, income yield, and other characteristics for each share class. We
merge the CRSP and Morningstar datasets via a two-stage procedure: first on ticker, and then
on CUSIP for any remaining unmatched cases. All funds are retained regardless of survivorship
status, and we define each fund’s active window based on its first and last appearance in the com-
bined CRSP-Morningstar panel.



                                                 10
   We augment the fund holdings panel with security-level and macroeconomic data to charac-
terize the portfolios more comprehensively. Monthly security-level characteristics are obtained
from the JKP Global Factor Database (Jensen et al., 2023), which provides a rich and standard-
ized set of cross-sectional predictors widely used in empirical asset pricing research. To capture
the macroeconomic environment faced by fund managers, we incorporate a set of aggregate vari-
ables from the Federal Reserve’s FRED database. We include real and nominal short-term interest
rates, the 10-year Treasury yield, the slope of the yield curve, and the BAA–Treasury credit spread,
along with other macroeconomic indicators.

   We begin by putting every fund–security holding on a monthly calendar, ensuring that each
security–fund pair has one observation per month. If a month is missing for a fund–security
pair, we carry forward its last known values to keep the time series continuous. We then restrict
our fund–security holding data to quarter-ends (Mar/Jun/Sep/Dec). Funds must span at least
seven calendar years and hold at least 10 securities per quarter; otherwise they are excluded. From
that monthly grid, we keep just March, June, September, and December. These are the quarter-
end snapshots we model. If a security briefly goes missing and then reappears, we allow a “recent
non-zero” fill for up to six months.

   For every quarter, we rank the fund’s holdings by market value and assign each one an integer
id: id = 1 is the largest holding, id = 2 the second-largest, and so on. We then lay the data onto
a template with one row per quarter and one column slot per rank. If a fund holds, for example,
75 securities this quarter but the template expects 100 slots, ids 76–100 are empty on purpose–
referred to as padding. This gives us a consistent width across time. Our final dataset includes
1,706 unique mutual funds and 5,434,702 fund–security–quarter observations over the sample
period.




                                                 11
3.2   Features and Target Variable Construction

The prediction task is defined at the fund–security–quarter level. For each fund i and security
position at time t, the target variable captures the direction of the subsequent quarter’s share (sh)
change. Specifically, we compute
                                                       
                                                        −1 ∆shi,t ≤ −0.01,
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                             shi,t+1 − shi,t           
                  ∆shi,t =                   ,   Yi,t = 0  |∆shi,t | < 0.01,
                               shi,t + 1               
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       +1 ∆shi,t ≥ 0.01.
                                                       


Here, −1 denotes trim/sell, 0 denotes no material change, and +1 denotes add/buy. A ±1%
band around zero counts as “no change.” This is therefore a three-class classification at the fund–
security level.

   We construct a rich set of features from the merged dataset. At the fund level, we include
lagged signals such as prior-quarter and multi-quarter returns, net cash flows aggregated at the
quarterly horizon, and lagged characteristics including fund size as well as measures of value and
momentum based on holdings or reported style metrics. At the security level, we incorporate
lagged firm characteristics, such as logarithmic market capitalization, book-to-market ratios, and
past return momentum, along with exposures to common risk factors. Factor predictors are
drawn from a curated set that includes market, size, value, profitability, investment, and short-
term reversal, merged at the permno–month level and aligned with quarterly observations. These
are included in Appendix A.

   Peer behaviors can affect the fund manager’s decision. To capture peer effects, we calculate ac-
tivity rates within the fund’s Morningstar style category. These include the share-increase, share-
decrease, and no-change frequencies of peer funds, along with their lags, thereby summarizing the
contemporaneous behavior of managers with similar mandates. The macroeconomic backdrop
is incorporated through quarterly lagged measures of the level and slope of the yield curve and


                                                 12
of credit conditions, including term spreads (such as five-year minus one-year and ten-year mi-
nus three-month), default spreads (e.g., BAA–Treasury), and related short- and long-term yields,
both nominal and real. These variables proxy for the broader financing and risk environment
faced by portfolio managers.

      Finally, we incorporate the within-fund context of each position. These features include the
current market value of the position and lagged share counts tracked up to six quarters, as well as
the dynamics of portfolio weights, and the size rank of the security within the fund each quarter.
To ensure the panel structure remains rectangular, we also include an indicator for padded obser-
vations, which flags rows that arise from balanced-panel construction rather than actual reported
holdings. All features are lagged so that they are observable at the time predictions are made.


3.3     Model, Empirical Design, and Evaluation

The machine learning model we use for the study is Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), which
was first introduced by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997). LSTM networks are a type of Re-
current Neural Network (RNN) designed to capture long-term dependencies in sequential data.
Unlike standard RNNs, which suffer from vanishing or exploding gradients when modeling long
sequences, LSTMs address this problem through a gating mechanism. This architecture is partic-
ularly appropriate for our application, as fund trading decisions may exhibit persistent patterns
over time, and effective prediction requires the model to retain and exploit these long-term de-
pendencies.

      LSTMs are composed of a set of recurrently connected subnets, called memory cells, contain-
ing three multiplicative units, the forget gate, input gate, and output gate. The basic architecture
of a memory block is shown in Figure 1, where Ct−1 and Ct represent the previous and current
state of the memory cell. ht−1 and ht are current and previous hidden states, and Xt is the cur-
rent signal. The forget gate decides which historical information to discard from the previous cell
state. It receives the previous hidden state ht−1 and current signal Xt and processes them using a


                                                 13
sigmoid activation function which generates a forget coefficient f (t) ∈ [0, 1] . If f (t) is close to
0, the past information is largely forgotten.

                          f (t) = φ (wf x · Xt + wf h · h(t − 1) + bf ) ,                         (11)


where φ(·) is the sigmoid function, wf x , wf h are the weight matrices, and bf is the bias term.
The input gate i(t) controls how much new information to add, which includes the following
components:


                          i(t) = φ (wix · Xt + wih · h(t − 1) + bi ) ,                            (12)

                                                                                                  (13)
                                                               
                        e = tanh wcx · Xt + wch · h(t − 1) + bc .
                        C(t)

The current state of the memory cell is determined by the previous state and the newly computed
candidate state C(t):
                e


                            C(t) = f (t) ⊙ C(t − 1) + i(t) ⊙ C(t),
                                                             e                                    (14)

where tanh(·) represents the hyperbolic tangent activation function. The output gate o(t) pre-
dicts the final outcome after quantifying the current information from the cell, which is calcu-
lated using:

                          o(t) = φ (wox · Xt + woh · h(t − 1) + bo ) .                            (15)

In addition, the hidden state h(t) is updated using:


                                                                                                  (16)
                                                          
                                   h(t) = o(t) ⊙ tanh C(t) .


   We construct the empirical design around rolling panels constructed from fund holdings. For
each eligible fund, we form overlapping windows of 28 quarters. Within a given window, we re-
tain up to N securities with N is determined by the realized cross-sectional size of the fund’s hold-
ings in that window. From each window, we generate fixed-length sequences of eight consecutive

                                                 14
quarters. Each sample is initially represented as a three-dimensional tensor X ∈ RT ×N ×F , where
the sequence length is T = 8, N is the number of distinct securities retained in the window, and
F is the number of security-level features. At each quarter t, securities are ordered in descending
order of market value within the fund. To feed the data into a standard single-layer LSTM, we
vectorize the cross-section at each time step by concatenating the ordered N × F feature matrix
into a single N F -dimensional vector. The resulting sequence (x1 , . . . , xT ) ∈ RT ×N F is used as
the LSTM input. This construction preserves the economic cross-section of fund holdings while
ensuring that the LSTM input dimension is fixed and comparable across samples.

   Each 28-quarter window is then split chronologically into training and test subsamples, with
the first 20 quarters reserved for training and the final eight quarters for testing (see Figure 2).
No random shuffling is employed, thereby preserving the time-series ordering of the data. We
explicitly log the implied train-test cutoff quarter for reproducibility. All inputs are implicitly
standardized by construction: the feature design relies on relative rankings within fixed-width
panels. While explicit normalization can be layered on top, it was not required for our baseline
feature set.

   We estimate a single-layer LSTM network on these sequences. The hidden dimension scales
with the size of the realized cross-section to balance model flexibility and overfitting risk. To
mitigate overfitting, we apply both dropout and recurrent dropout, each with a rate of 0.25. The
output of the recurrent layer is passed through a dense transformation, reshaped and mapped to
a probability grid of dimension (N × 3) via a softmax activation. This design yields, for each
security in the retained cross-section, a probability distribution across three mutually exclusive
states.




                                                 15
   We include two masks that encode feasibility. First, we implement a time-step mask. At any
quarter in which the cross-sectional panel is purely synthetic, that is, all securities in the retained
output set are padding indicators (sh_past = 0 for every identifier), we mask the entire time
step from recurrence. This prevents the network from updating parameters based on artificial or
economically irrelevant observations.

   Second, we impose an output feasibility mask at the security level. For a given identifier, let
the predicted softmax vector be p = (p−1 , p0 , p+1 ), corresponding to sell, hold, and buy states.
If the security lacks continuous presence over the full eight-quarter input horizon (i.e., if any pe-
riod exhibits sh_past = 0), we enforce feasibility by zeroing out the sell probability p−1 and
renormalizing the distribution over the remaining states {0, +1}. A looser variant of this mask
requires only that the security be held in the final quarter of the input horizon, thereby accom-
modating entry within the window while still prohibiting spurious sell signals.

   Our estimation objective is a weighted categorical cross-entropy loss:

                                              X
                                  L=−                   wc yc log pc ,
                                          c∈{−1,0,+1}


where yc is the true class indicator, pc is the predicted probability, and wc denotes the class weight.
By default, wc = 1 for all classes. To enhance robustness to class imbalance and to emphasize
hard-to-classify observations, we also implement an optional focal variant in which the loss is
multiplied by (1 − pc )γ , with γ = 1. Optimization proceeds using the Adam algorithm with
early stopping based on validation loss. The training horizon is capped at 50 epochs, ensuring
convergence while preventing overfitting.

   To benchmark model performance, we construct both a naive baseline and a set of model-
based precision measures. We first define a naive precision benchmark. For each training win-
dow, the naive classifier predicts the max (frequency) class observed across all securities and time
steps. This baseline provides a conservative reference point, ensuring that measured gains are not
artifacts of class imbalance.


                                                  16
    We then compute model precisions for both the naive and LSTM-based predictors. We adjust
our precision metrics by restricting attention to feasible cases. Specifically, we restrict attention
to test outputs where the feasibility mask permits a sell decision, i.e., securities with continuous
presence over the input horizon.


4    Summary Statistics

We describe the data and sample in Section 3. In Table I, we show the summary statistics at the
fund level. From Panel A of Table I, managers in our sample have an average tenure of over 13 years
(Manager Tenure (Mean)) as we require a minimum of 7 years to train and test the managers’
behavior. The Manager Tenure (Max) variable takes the maximum of this tenure for each team-
managed fund, and thus is slightly longer at an average of roughly 15 years. Managers on average
manage 2.83 funds across 2 different investment style categories.

    From Panel B of Table I, the average fund age is roughly 14 years, and has 3.6 managers per
fund. The average fund faces 75 fund competitors within the category, and has an average of 4.79
funds in the fund management company.

    Table II then shows additional fund-specific characteristics of the sample. The average naive
prediction precision of a fund manager’s trading behavior in the sample is 0.52, meaning that
we can predict (buy, sell, hold) decisions at the security-quarter level at 52% accuracy. The naive
prediction model simply looks at the most common behavioral action of the manager (max fre-
quency, also termed the Majority Class or Zero Rule Classifier) during the training period. In
contrast, our AI training model described in Section 3 achieves an average prediction precision
of 71%, a substantial economic and statistically large increase of 36.5% (p < 0.0001). The average
fund size is roughly 700 million dollars (maximum of over 38 billion dollars), with 5.29 million
dollars of average flows each quarter. Moreover, 95% are listed as open to new investment each
quarter.




                                                 17
      In Table III, we examine the average position characteristics at the firm-quarter-fund level.
From Panel A, for instance, the average position size is roughly $6 million, and we examine the
top 100 positions held by these active equity fund managers. From Panel B, the average ME (firm
size) over our sample period of held firms is roughly $30 billion, with a median size of $6 billion.


5      Main Results

5.1     Full Sample Results

The central aim of the study is to explore the proportion – and which proportion – of fund
manager’s behavior can be predicted using the fund manager’s past behaviors, and their reactions
to market conditions, and changing firm characteristics. Using modern AI-ML techniques and
tools, drawing systematic and repeated components of these behaviors is becoming ever-more
tractable.

      In Figure 3, we illustrate using the simple and straightforward model we outline in Section 3
the potential to do exactly this. In particular, the shaded red distribution uses the Max Frequency
estimator – also termed the Majority Class or Zero Rule Classifier. This estimator uses the most
frequent behavior by the manager in the training period (sell, hold, or buy) and applies this as the
naive estimated behavior for all of her future trades in her testing period. This results in a fairly
wide distribution of estimated precisions, with a mean precision of estimated behavior of 0.52,
or 52% of the correctly predicted trades. In contrast, applying our simple AI model that learns
from the manager’s past behavior, the average prediction accuracy jumps to 71%. This difference
represents a 36.5% increase in prediction accuracy, and is highly significant (p < 0.0001). Fur-
ther, as can be seen in Figure 3, the entire distribution of prediction accuracy tightens and shifts
to the right. Thus, a substantially larger percentage of the sample of fund managers can be pre-
dicted more accurately, with significantly fewer managers being predicted with less accuracy. In
fact, while 44.38% of the managers fall below the 50% prediction accuracy threshold for the naive
prediction method, only 11.11% fall below this 50% threshold using our simple AI model.

                                                 18
5.2   Cross-sectional and Time-series Dynamics of Precision Score

Figure 4 then graphs the time-series of this prediction precision over the sample period. From
Panel A, graphing the prediction precision of our AI model over time, the precision is fairly sta-
ble around the 71% mean, exhibiting a slightly upward trend toward the end of the sample pe-
riod, moving toward present-day. In addition, quantitative tools and factor investing became
more common, which again could drive their predictability (using loadings on these factors), in-
creasing potential predictability. Panel B then graphs this corresponding time series for the naive
prediction model. From Panel B, we again see a fairly stable precision over time around the mean
of 52%, without an increase toward the end of the sample period.

   In Figure 5, we plot prediction precision across Morningstar fund style categories. Across all
nine style groups, the prediction precision of our model is significantly higher than that of the
naive prediction, and retains a similar shape. The mass of the distribution has shifted signifi-
cantly rightward, toward higher accuracy levels. That said, differences do emerge: large-cap and
mid-cap categories generally have higher precision than small-cap. This is true across the growth,
Value, and blend categories. The single highest prediction precision is seen in the mid-cap blend
category, with our model achieving a 75% prediction accuracy, on average. Figure 6 then similarly
separates our fund universe into broad size categorizations - small, mid, and large - including spe-
cialized funds (e.g., sector or geographic focused funds) in the other category. Consistent with
Figure 5, Figure 6 shows that large and mid-sized funds exhibit higher median prediction preci-
sion relative to small and other funds, and their distributions are more concentrated at the upper
end of the precision scale. By contrast, small and especially other funds display wider dispersion
and lower central precision tendency, indicating greater heterogeneity and average lower preci-
sion among these groups.




                                                19
    Figure 7 then plots the time series of prediction precision of fund categories over the sam-
ple period. Across time – and in particular, post-2000 – large and mid-sized fund categories
achieve higher prediction precision relative to small and other funds. All groups also exhibit im-
provement over time, in particular post-2016, consistent with the general time pattern observed
in Figure 4.


6     Dynamics of Precision Score at the Fund and Security Level

Section 6 explores the prediction performance of our baseline AI model described in Section 3.
The average prediction precision of 71% of managers’ trading decisions (buy, hold, and sell) was
relatively stable across time and fund categories, and substantially larger than the naive prediction
method. In this section, we turn to examining the manager, fund, and security characteristics
associated with the highest (and lowest) predictive accuracy across and within funds.


6.1    Fund and Manager Level

We begin by examining fund and manager level characteristics. The results in Table IV pro-
vide an examination of fund manager characteristics’ association with the prediction accuracy
of fund-level investment behavior. A consistent finding across specifications is that managerial
tenure, along with when managers are stretched across more funds, is associated with a signifi-
cantly higher ability to predict subsequent trading behavior. In contrast, managerial ownership
appears to work in the opposite direction, with higher managerial ownership of the fund leading
to less predictive ability of their trading behavior.

    The specifications in Table IV regress future prediction precision at the fund-quarter level on
a host of manager level characteristics. Year and fund fixed effects are included to ensure that the
results are not driven by temporal shocks or persistent fund-level heterogeneity. For instance, con-
trolling for temporal-level shocks or variation across all funds (e.g., the financial crisis of 2008),




                                                  20
along with potential stable idiosyncratic components of funds’ universes (e.g., large, well-covered
technology firms versus smaller, less well-covered oil prospecting firms). Standard errors are clus-
tered at the quarter level.

   Starting with Manager Ownership, the coefficient is negative and highly significant, indicat-
ing that funds in which managers have larger personal stakes in the form of dollar ownership
have trading behavior that is more difficult to predict. One interpretation is that when managers
hold significant ownership, they may be more incentive-aligned and thus take active decisions to
optimize portfolio choice and trading dynamics. Turning to Manager Tenure, both the maxi-
mum tenure (measured in quarters across the longest-serving manager) and the average tenure
across managers show positive and statistically significant relations. This implies that more ex-
perienced managers, whether considered individually or collectively, are associated with easier to
predict trading behavior. A plausible interpretation is that long-tenured managers develop stable
decision-making patterns and investment philosophies, making their trading easier to anticipate.

   The results for Manager #Funds and Manager #Styles further highlight the potential impor-
tance of managerial scope. Managers who simultaneously oversee more funds or adopt multiple
investment styles have trading behavior that is significantly easier to predict. Managing multiple
funds or strategies (with a common constraint on time) may require a degree of standardiza-
tion, and reliance on common investment processes or models, which again creates regularity in
decision-making that the model can capture.

   Taken together, these results suggest that fund behaviors are most predictable among seasoned
managers with broad responsibilities, while in contexts where managers hold significant personal
ownership stakes, this reduces predictability.

   Table V analyzes how fund characteristics influence prediction precision, using an analogous
empirical specification to Table IV. The broad findings provide evidence suggesting that the abil-
ity to predict fund-level managerial behavior increases with fund age, while size of the team –
along with competition both within and across fund families – reduces predictive ability.


                                                 21
   In more detail, Fund Age, measured by the number of quarters since inception, is associated
with significantly higher prediction precision. This suggests that as funds mature, their strate-
gies and trading behavior become more predictable, perhaps as they become more stable and
consistent over time, making them easier for the model to capture. In contrast, both forms of
competition, within category and within management company, are negatively associated with
prediction precision. The negative coefficient on Within Category Competition indicates that
funds facing a higher number of peers within the same investment category are harder to predict.
Competitive pressure may lead managers to adjust their trading in response to rivals’ strategies,
causing behavior that is less regular and harder for the model to capture. The stronger negative
effect of Within Management Company Competition suggests that when many funds coexist
within the same parent company, prediction becomes even more challenging. Internal dynam-
ics, or overlapping mandates, may add complexity to game-theoretic decision-making, thereby
reducing the regularity of trading patterns.

   Finally, the results for Number of Managers point to a clear pattern: funds managed by larger
teams exhibit lower prediction precision. While multiple managers may bring diverse perspec-
tives, this diversity can lead to less consistent and predictable aggregate decision-making. Differ-
ences in judgment, coordination challenges, or rotation of responsibilities among managers all
may contribute to greater variation in trading outcomes, which weakens predictability from the
model’s perspective.

   Lastly, Table VI examines portfolio and fee aspects of funds and their relationships with pre-
diction precision, with analogous empirical specifications to Tables IV and V, including year and
fund fixed effects. Column 1 shows a strong negative relationship between fund size and predic-
tion precision. The coefficient on total net asset (–2.1384, significant at the 1% level) implies that
larger funds are systematically more difficult to predict. As funds grow in size, they may be re-
quired to execute more complex trades and trades at different scales, both of which could add
variability to their portfolio decisions. Column 2 demonstrates that funds with higher turnover
ratios are less predictable. The coefficient (–0.0149, t = –9.712) is highly significant and indicates

                                                 22
that each incremental increase in turnover is associated with a measurable decline in prediction
precision. High turnover suggests more active trading, frequent rebalancing, and shorter invest-
ment horizons, which could generate more irregularity and heterogeneity in trading patterns.

   Column 3 finds that fund flows negatively affect prediction precision. The coefficient on Fund
Flow is –4.5290 (significant at 5%), suggesting that large inflows or outflows into the fund in a
given quarter reduce predictability. Investor-driven capital movements force managers to accom-
modate cash injections or redemptions in ways that may not perfectly align with underlying strat-
egy, resulting in less consistent trading behavior, thus causing reduced predictability. Column 4
shows that higher management fees are associated with reduced prediction precision (–0.0078,
significant at the 5% level). This could indicate that managers who are more active, charge higher
fees for this activity (in equilibrium) to investors. In contrast, there is no significant association
between the total expense ratio of the fund and prediction precision, from Column 5. These
jointly suggest that only the active management component of fees is associated with predictabil-
ity, while general administrative or operational costs have a less meaningful relationship with trad-
ing regularity.

   Column 6 indicates that funds open to new investors are less predictable (–0.0060, significant
at the 1% level). It may be that when funds remain open, they are more exposed to unpredictable
investor inflows, which may compel managers to adjust holdings in irregular ways. This con-
trasts with closed funds, where managers are less exposed to frequent disruptions from capital
movements. The final specification in Column 7 finds that funds with sales restrictions are more
predictable. The coefficient (0.0578, t = 4.874) suggests that restrictions – such as minimum
holding periods or redemption fees - may stabilize investor allocation behavior by discouraging
short-term withdrawals, again reducing large short-run fluctuations that would induce more vari-
able trading.




                                                 23
   Taken together, the results suggest that smaller funds with lower turnover, stable flows, lim-
ited investor access, and sales restrictions have more predictable trading patterns that can be antic-
ipated. In contrast, larger funds, those with high turnover, heavy flows, and higher management
fees, may employ more complex or variable strategies that are more difficult to forecast.

   From a broader perspective, these findings suggest that fund characteristics shape not only
performance and risk, as commonly studied, but also are associated with the degree to which
managers’ behaviors in these funds can be captured by AI and machine learning models.


6.2   Security Level

In this section, we move on to explore whether certain characteristics of underlying firms them-
selves are associated with being more or less predictable in mutual fund manager’s trading behav-
ior in these firms.

   We begin in Table VII, exploring prediction precision of fund managers at the fund-quarter-
security level holding level. All specifications include Quarter-Year FE and Firm FE, and standard
errors are two-way clustered by firm and quarter, so results are robust to both cross-sectional
and temporal correlation. Column 1 indicates that Portfolio Position – measured as the largest
holding (1) to the smallest (100) – has a strong positive association with prediction precision.
The coefficient of 0.0020 is highly significant, and suggests that securities held as smaller relative
positions in the fund (and so a higher Portfolio Position) are more predictable. As these have a
smaller relative contribution to fund-level return, one might expect managers to allocate fewer
variable rules and adjustments to these positions, resulting in more predictable behavior among
them. Column 2 then examines firm size, measured by market equity. The coefficient is negative
and significant, implying that larger firms are slightly harder to predict once their securities are
held in fund portfolios. This is consistent with Column 1, in that these are often larger positions
held within funds, and more actively and heterogeneously traded and rebalanced.




                                                 24
   Column 3 adds the number of distinct funds holding a given security in a given quarter. The
coefficient of –0.0002 (t = 4.659) implies that securities held by more funds are on average less
predictable. When a stock is widely held across many funds, trading activity may reflect hetero-
geneity (e.g., style rebalancing, liquidity needs, benchmark-tracking differences) across funds, in-
troducing complexity that lowers prediction accuracy at the security level. By contrast, securities
held by fewer funds may potentially be those that align with fund-specific strategies, which the
model can capture more reliably, along with this measure likely being correlated with firm size (as
larger stocks on average have increased breadth of institutional ownership). Column 4 introduces
Firm Age, measured as the number of months since the firm’s first appearance in CRSP. The co-
efficient is positive and significant, suggesting that older firms are slightly more predictable. This
could reflect mature firms being larger, along with having potentially greater stability and pre-
dictability of firm-level action, compared to newer firms with more growth uncertainty, or rapid
valuation shifts.

   Table VIII then explores a number of additional firm-level fundamental characteristics. These
include standard dimensions of, capital structure, profitability, growth, cash flows, and equity
issuance, exploring which types of firms are associated with more predictable security-level trad-
ing outcomes. In Column 1, leverage has a strong positive relationship with prediction precision,
suggesting that firms with higher debt-to-market equity ratios are more predictable. One possible
explanation for this is that highly leveraged firms may be monitored closely, reducing uncertainty
in trading behavior surrounding them. In Column 2, the coefficient on Asset Turnover (net sales
relative to assets) is negative and significant, suggesting that firms that more quickly turnover as-
sets into sales may be more actively and variably traded, and so more difficult to predict. Of the
remaining firm fundamental proxies, a number are significantly associated with fund manager’s
predictability of their trading. Fund manager trading behavior is significantly more predictable
for Value firms (Column 7), high Free Cash Flow firms (Column 6), and high Net Equity Payout
firms (Column 8), as all could be more stable and so predictable in optimal portfolio composi-



                                                 25
tion and position. In contrast, firms with earnings surprises (Column 9), show less predictability,
perhaps due to the inability of market participants to anticipate future cash flow and earnings re-
alizations.

    In sum, the results in Table VIII provide suggestive evidence that predictability is higher for
stable, mature firms with stronger balance sheets and predictable payout policies. In contrast, pre-
dictability appears lower for growth, high R&D, and shock-prone firms, subject to larger earnings
surprises.

    Lastly, Table IX explores the relationship of past firm returns and realized return volatility with
fund manager predictability of behavior in the firms. These capture return-based factors such as
short-term reversals, momentum, and idiosyncratic volatility.

    From Table IX, the only return-based variables that are significantly associated with fund man-
ager predictability in behavior are Past 1 Month Returns and Idiosyncratic Volatility. From Col-
umn 1, the coefficient on Past 1 Month Returns is negative and significant (–0.0239, t = -3.089).
This suggests that stocks experiencing recent short-term negative returns are somewhat easier to
predict manager trading behavior around. From Column 4, stocks that have higher idiosyncratic
volatility (measured as the standard deviation of residuals from a CAPM regression estimated
over the prior 36 months), have a marginally significantly higher predictability in fund manager
trading behavior surrounding them.


7    Implications for Fund Return Predictability

While prior sections have explored the associations of fund, manager, and firm-level characteris-
tics with the ability to predict fund manager’s trading behavior, in this section we ask whether
managers whose behavior is easier or more difficult to predict exhibit differing levels of perfor-
mance. To test this, we split our manager universe each quarter by their ranking on predictability
of trading behavior in the testing period. We split managers into quintiles, and measure the future
performance of each quintile.


                                                  26
   The results are in Table X, where Q1 is those managers with the least prediction precision up
through Q5 – managers whose trades are easiest to predict. The table reports benchmark-adjusted
abnormal returns (relative to funds in the same Morningstar category) over horizons of one to
four quarters. The table highlights both individual quintile performance and the spread between
the highest-precision (Q5) and lowest-precision (Q1) quintiles.

   Managers whose trading behavior is the most difficult to predict (Q1) consistently generate
positive and significant abnormal returns over all horizons. At the one-quarter horizon, Q1 funds
earn 0.14% (t = 2.05), which rises steadily to a cumulative abnormal return of 0.36% (t = 2.88)
by quarter four. This indicates that funds with the least predictable trading behavior outperform
their category peers, an effect that does not reverse, but strengthens over longer horizons.

   In stark contrast, Q5 fund managers – those whose trading is easiest to predict – consistently
underperform peer funds. Their cumulative abnormal returns are slightly negative in the short
run (–0.09% at one quarter, t = 1.52), becoming increasingly negative and statistically significant
over longer horizons (–0.22% at two quarters, –0.31% at three quarters, –0.42% at four quarters,
t = 2.36).

   Prediction precision appears to be a relevant attribute that acts across the entire fund manager
universe – not only acting upon the extremes of the distribution. From Table X, returns are nearly
monotonic in prediction precision at each of the four horizons. Turning to the Q1–Q5 Spread,
which reports the difference in excess returns between the least predictable and most predictable
funds, this difference is significant at each horizon and increasing across horizons. In particular,
from 0.23% (t = 2.13) at one quarter to 0.79% (t = 3.05) at four quarters. Figure 8 illustrates these
return regularities across quintiles for each of the various horizons.

   To assess the robustness of these findings to different risk adjustment methodologies, Table
XI reports the cumulative four-quarter excess return and alphas generated by quintile portfolios
sorted on prediction precision, using multiple factor models. Consistent with the excess return
analysis in Table X, we observe a strong negative relationship between trading predictability and


                                                 27
risk-adjusted performance. Managers in the lowest-precision quintile (Q1) generate significant al-
phas across all specifications: 0.37% under the Fama-French three-factor model, 0.31% under the
four-factor model, and 0.37% under the five-factor model, all statistically significant at conven-
tional levels. Conversely, managers in the highest-precision quintile (Q5) consistently underper-
form, with alphas ranging from –0.41% to –0.48%, again significant at the 1% level. The Q1–Q5
spread ranges from 0.78% to 0.82% across factor models (all t-statistics exceed 2.5), demonstrat-
ing that the superior performance of unpredictable managers is not merely compensation for
systematic risk exposure, but rather reflects superior stock-picking ability or market-timing skill
that persists after controlling for standard asset pricing factors.

      Table X, Table XI, and Figure 8 provide strong and consistent evidence that funds whose trad-
ing is highly predictable underperform their peers, while those that are least predictable deliver
superior returns. This result is both statistically and economically meaningful, particularly at
horizons of three to four quarters, where the return spreads become sizable. As potential drivers
of these dynamics, predictable funds could be those that follow more mechanical strategies, that
may be relatively easier for models to learn, but also potentially for markets to anticipate, learn,
and quickly price, reducing their ability to generate alpha. By contrast, unpredictable funds may
reflect managers who adapt dynamically or exploit informational advantages, leading to stronger
subsequent performance.


7.1     Correctly vs. Incorrectly Predicted Positions - Portfolio Level

From Table II and Figure 3, we find that, on average, we are able to predict 71% of a fund manager’s
trades each quarter. The question then is whether the relative out-performance of unpredictable
fund managers found in Table X is driven by the 29% of her portfolio that we cannot predict, on
average, or the 71% that we are able to. In order to test this, for each fund-quarter observation, we
split each manager’s stocks into two portfolios: an “Incorrect Predictions” portfolio that contains
stocks where the fund’s predicted direction was wrong, and “Correct Predictions,” containing



                                                  28
stocks where the fund’s predicted direction was accurate. We take the average of quarterly returns
each quarter across all managers’ “Correct Predictions” and “Incorrect Predictions” portfolios
and report them in Table XII.

   From Table XII, the incorrect positions strongly outperform correct positions. The results
show that the Incorrect Predictions portfolio (holdings harder to predict) generates a mean an-
nualized return of 7.98% compared to 7.07% for Correct Predictions (holdings easier to predict),
yielding a difference of 91 basis points. The t-statistic of 12.41 indicates this difference is highly sta-
tistically significant at the 1% level. Table XII also provides robustness evidence at the holding level
by examining both excess returns and factor-adjusted alphas. We decompose each fund’s portfolio
into two distinct components based on prediction accuracy: stocks where our model correctly
predicted the fund’s direction versus those where it was incorrect. For both excess returns and
the three-, four-, and five-factor models, holdings where the fund’s trading direction was incor-
rectly predicted substantially outperform those with correct predictions. Panel A presents fund-
quarter-level analysis using all fund-quarter observations, where each fund-quarter contributes
one observation for both correct and incorrect prediction portfolios.

   Figure 9 then plots the cumulative returns to both the Correct Predictions Portfolio and In-
correct Predictions Portfolio over the entire sample period. Panel A shows this separately for
both portfolios, while Panel B graphs the cumulative (L-S) difference between the two over time.
From Figure 9, the Correct Predictions Portfolio outperforms the Incorrect Predictions Portfo-
lio during nearly the entire sample period, with the cumulative difference rising relatively stably
throughout the period.


7.2   Correctly vs. Incorrectly Predicted Positions - Security Level

Table XIII then explores this question in a slightly different specification. Namely, it tests whether
the signals across all managers can be aggregated to arrive at a security-time level measure with
implications for return realizations. In particular, Table XIII reports the performance of quintile


                                                    29
stock portfolios formed on stocks’ percentage of correct directional prediction by fund managers
that held that stock. Each quarter, stocks are ranked by the average prediction accuracy of all
funds holding that stock and sorted into five equal-weighted portfolios. Quintile 1 (Q1) captures
stocks where, on average, the behavior of fund managers is least predictable, while Quintile 5
(Q5) contains stocks where, on average, the behavior of fund managers is most predictable. From
Table XIII, stocks in which the behavior of fund managers are least predictable (Q1) strongly out-
perform stocks in which the behavior of fund managers are most predictable (Q5) in the coming
quarter. The long-short (Q1–Q5) difference between the two generate an average return of 424
basis points (t = 5.74) annualized over the next year. Moreover, across all quintile portfolios, the
returns are monotonically decreasing across the predictability from Quintile 1 through Quintile
5.

     For robustness, we also examine excess returns and factor-adjusted alphas across the quintile
portfolios. Table XIII also reports performance metrics across multiple return specifications, in-
cluding excess returns and three-, four-, and five-factor Fama-French alphas. The results demon-
strate that the outperformance of stocks with least predictable manager behavior (Q1) relative to
most predictable behavior (Q5) is robust across all specifications. The long-short (Q1–Q5) port-
folio generates substantial and statistically significant alphas, for instance with a Fama-French
five-factor annualized alpha of 386 basis points (t = 4.96).

     Figure 10 shows the cumulative returns of each quintile over the entire sample period. Panel
A shows that the cumulative difference between portfolios is monotonic, with the gap in cu-
mulative returns across the portfolios increasing over time. Panel B then plots the cumulative
long-short difference (Q1–Q5) between the two levels of predictability over time. Again, this cu-
mulative outperformance appears across the entire sample period, with the difference rising stably
throughout the sample period. Figure 10 also demonstrates the robustness and persistence of our
main findings across the entire sample period and multiple risk-adjustment specifications. The
figure displays cumulative performance trajectories for quintile portfolios formed on fund man-
ager’s prediction accuracy, with results presented across four return specifications: excess returns,

                                                 30
FF3 alpha, FF4 alpha, and FF5 alpha. Across all four specifications, stocks where fund managers
are least accurate in predicting directional returns (Q1) consistently and substantially outperform
stocks for which managers are most accurate (Q5), with this performance ranking remaining re-
markably stable throughout our sample period.


7.3   Fama-MacBeth Regression Framework with Active Shares Control

To further examine the robustness of our findings using an alternative empirical framework, we
employ Fama-MacBeth regressions to assess the relationship between prediction precision and
subsequent abnormal returns while controlling for additional fund characteristics. Specifically,
we include Active Share as a control variable, which Cremers and Petajisto (2009) define as the
fraction of a fund’s portfolio level holdings that differ from its benchmark index. This metric
captures the degree to which a manager’s portfolio deviates from its benchmark and serves as a
control as it may reflect managerial skill or conviction independent of predictability.

   Table XIV presents the results of these cross-sectional regressions, where the dependent vari-
able is cumulative abnormal returns measured from quarter 0 through 4. Standard errors are
adjusted following the Newey-West procedure to account for potential autocorrelation and het-
eroskedasticity in the time series of cross-sectional regression estimates. The inclusion of Active
Share as a control allows us to isolate the effect of Prediction Precision regarding active trading
on abnormal returns from effects driven by portfolio-level deviations from the benchmark.

   The coefficient on Prediction Precision remains economically and statistically significant across
all specifications, even after the inclusion of Active Share. In Model (1), the coefficient on Predic-
tion Precision is –0.8554 and statistically significant at the 5% level. Upon adding Active Share as
a control in Model (2), the coefficient on Prediction Precision increases slightly in magnitude to
–1.0074 (t = –2.38, p < 0.05), while Active Share itself enters with a positive and significant coef-
ficient of 0.0041 (t = 5.13, p < 0.01). Critically, the magnitude and significance of the Prediction
Precision regarding active trading decisions remains largely unchanged, demonstrating that our


                                                  31
findings are not driven by differences in portfolio-level deviations from benchmarks. Rather, the
predictability of trading behavior itself emerges as a distinct and robust predictor of abnormal
returns, orthogonal to the level of Active Share.


8    Conclusion

We construct a new measure and a benchmark to assess manager performance, namely the simple
measure of behaviors that can (and cannot) be easily predicted and replicated. We use a straight-
forward AI model to learn and replicate the trading behavior of managers. Using simple measures
of managers’ past behaviors, along with fund-, manager-, and firm-level characteristics, we train
the model to predict future manager trading behavior. On average, our model is able to predict
71% of active equity managers’ trades (buy, hold, and sell). This predictability is relatively sta-
ble across the entire sample period and across fund manager styles. Moreover, this predictability
of behavior is strongly associated with future performance: managers whose behavior is most
predictable significantly underperform their peers, while those who are least predictable exhibit
strong future outperformance. Further, this outperformance is concentrated in the securities
that are least predictable, both within and across fund managers.

    Stepping back, the results have broad implications. In theory, compensation to agents should
not be tied to dimensions of behavior or human capital that can be replicated at low cost. Con-
sequently, equilibrium outcomes – such as wage levels, hiring practices, and job tenure – may
be materially influenced. However, financial agents also have a role and best-response in this dy-
namic game. For example, faced with more powerful detection and replication tools, agents could
take measures to obfuscate and change behavior to reduce the ability of these tools to extract pre-
dictable behaviors. In equilibrium, the new labor wage- and duration-contract, and its dynamics,
must take into account these burgeoning tools and implications.




                                                32
   Lastly, while we have focused on the economic agents of active mutual fund managers in this
paper, future research should address equivalent implications across the agent spectrum. These
range from other financial agents such as sell-side analysts, to other firm-level decision-makers
such as CEOs, who synthesize both public and private information held within and across these
organizations and markets.




                                               33
References

Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2020). Robots and jobs: Evidence from us labor markets. Journal of
  Political Economy 128(6), 2188–2244.

Autor, D. H. and D. Dorn (2013). The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of the us labor
  market. American Economic Review 103(5), 1553–1597.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2015). Untangling trade and technology: Evidence from local

  labour markets. The Economic Journal 125(584), 621–646.

Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003). The skill content of recent technological change: An
  empirical exploration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4), 1279–1333.

Bartel, A., C. Ichniowski, and K. Shaw (2007). How does information technology affect productiv-

  ity? plant-level comparisons of product innovation, process improvement, and worker skills. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(4), 1721–1758.

Berk, J. B. and J. H. Van Binsbergen (2015). Measuring skill in the mutual fund industry. Journal of

  Financial Economics 118(1), 1–20.

Brynjolfsson, E., D. Li, and L. Raymond (2025). Generative ai at work. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 140(2), 889–942.

Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. The Journal of Finance 52(1), 57–82.

Chen, L., M. Pelger, and J. Zhu (2024). Deep learning in asset pricing. Management Science 70(2),

  714–750.

Choi, J. H. and D. Schwarcz (2024). Ai assistance in legal analysis: An empirical study. Journal of Legal
  Education 73, 384.

Cohen, L., C. Malloy, and Q. Nguyen (2020). Lazy prices. The Journal of Finance 75(3), 1371–1415.




                                                   34
Cremers, K. M. and A. Petajisto (2009). How active is your fund manager? a new measure that predicts
  performance. The Review of Financial Studies 22(9), 3329–3365.

Daniel, K., M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers (1997). Measuring mutual fund performance with
  characteristic-based benchmarks. The Journal of Finance 52(3), 1035–1058.

De Haan, E., C. Lee, M. Liu, and S. Noh (2025). The shadow price of “public” information. Working
  Paper.

Dell’Acqua, F., E. McFowland III, E. R. Mollick, H. Lifshitz-Assaf, K. Kellogg, S. Rajendran, L. Krayer,
  F. Candelon, and K. R. Lakhani (2023). Navigating the jagged technological frontier: Field experi-

  mental evidence of the effects of ai on knowledge worker productivity and quality. Harvard Business
  School Technology & Operations Mgt. Unit Working Paper (24-013).

DeMiguel, V., J. Gil-Bazo, F. J. Nogales, and A. A. Santos (2023). Machine learning and fund character-

  istics help to select mutual funds with positive alpha. Journal of Financial Economics 150(3), 103737.

Freyberger, J., A. Neuhierl, and M. Weber (2020). Dissecting characteristics nonparametrically. The
  Review of Financial Studies 33(5), 2326–2377.

Gabaix, X., R. S. Koijen, R. Richmond, and M. Yogo (2024). Asset embeddings. Available at SSRN.

Gabaix, X., R. S. Koijen, R. Richmond, and M. Yogo (2025). Upgrading credit pricing and risk assessment

  through embeddings. Working Paper.

Goos, M. and A. Manning (2007). Lousy and lovely jobs: The rising polarization of work in britain. The
  Review of Economics and Statistics 89(1), 118–133.

Grinblatt, M. and S. Titman (1989). Mutual fund performance: An analysis of quarterly portfolio hold-

  ings. Journal of Business, 393–416.

Grinblatt, M. and S. Titman (1993). Performance measurement without benchmarks: An examination
  of mutual fund returns. Journal of Business, 47–68.

Gu, S., B. Kelly, and D. Xiu (2020). Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. The Review of Financial

  Studies 33(5), 2223–2273.




                                                   35
Gu, S., B. Kelly, and D. Xiu (2021). Autoencoder asset pricing models. Journal of Econometrics 222(1),
   429–450.

Guercio, D. D. and J. Reuter (2014). Mutual fund performance and the incentive to generate alpha. The
   Journal of Finance 69(4), 1673–1704.

Hochreiter, S. and J. Schmidhuber (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural Computation 9(8), 1735–
   1780.

Jensen, M. C. (1968). The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964. The Journal of
   Finance 23(2), 389–416.

Jensen, T. I., B. Kelly, and L. H. Pedersen (2023). Is there a replication crisis in finance? The Journal of
   Finance 78(5), 2465–2518.

Kacperczyk, M., C. Sialm, and L. Zheng (2008). Unobserved actions of mutual funds. The Review of
   Financial Studies 21(6), 2379–2416.

Kacperczyk, M. T., C. Sialm, and L. Zheng (2007). Industry concentration and mutual fund perfor-
   mance. Journal of Investment Management 5(1), 50–64.

Kaniel, R., Z. Lin, M. Pelger, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2023). Machine-learning the skill of mutual
   fund managers. Journal of Financial Economics 150(1), 94–138.

Kelly, B. T., S. Pruitt, and Y. Su (2019). Characteristics are covariances: A unified model of risk and return.
   Journal of Financial Economics 134(3), 501–524.

Malkiel, B. G. (1995). Returns from investing in equity mutual funds 1971 to 1991. The Journal of
   Finance 50(2), 549–572.

Michaels, G., A. Natraj, and J. Van Reenen (2014). Has ict polarized skill demand? evidence from eleven

   countries over twenty-five years. Review of Economics and Statistics 96(1), 60–77.

Noy, S. and W. Zhang (2023). Experimental evidence on the productivity effects of generative artificial
   intelligence. Science 381(6654), 187–192.

Peng, S., E. Kalliamvakou, P. Cihon, and M. Demirer (2023). The impact of ai on developer productivity:

   Evidence from github copilot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06590.


                                                      36
Spence, M. (1981). Signaling, screening, and information. In Studies in Labor Markets, pp. 319–358.
  University of Chicago Press.

Walther, T. and M. Dutordoir (2025). Certainly! generative ai and its impact on academic writing (in
  finance). Working Paper.

Wermers, R. (1997). Momentum investment strategies of mutual funds, performance persistence, and
  survivorship bias. Unpublished Working Paper, University of Colorado.

Wu, W., J. Chen, Z. Yang, and M. L. Tindall (2021). A cross-sectional machine learning approach for
  hedge fund return prediction and selection. Management Science 67(7), 4577–4601.




                                                37
                Figure 1. Architecture of a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Cell
This figure illustrates the architecture of a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) cell. The cell consists of

three main components: the forget gate, the input gate, and the output gate. The forget gate determines
how much of the previous cell state (ct−1 ) is retained, based on the sigmoid activation function (ft ). The
input gate regulates how much new information, derived from the current input (Xt ) and prior hidden

state (ht−1 ), is incorporated into the cell state via the sigmoid and tanh functions (it , c̃t ). The output
gate controls how much of the updated cell state (ct ) influences the current hidden state (ht ), again using
sigmoid and tanh activations (ot ). The diagram uses symbols to denote operations: circles with a cross

represent multiplication, circles with a plus represent addition, and labeled blocks represent nonlinear
activations (sigmoid or tanh). Together, these components enable the LSTM cell to preserve long-term
dependencies while mitigating vanishing or exploding gradient problems during training.




                                                     38
                         Figure 2. The training and testing time periods
This figure illustrates the rolling training and testing periods used in the analysis. Each observation

window consists of a five-year training period followed by a two-year testing period, with both windows
advancing forward one quarter at a time. For example, Observation 1 uses data from 2000Q1–2004Q4
for training and 2005Q1–2006Q4 for testing. Observation 2 shifts forward by one quarter, training on

2000Q2–2005Q1 and testing on 2005Q2–2007Q1, while Observation 3 trains on 2000Q3–2005Q2 and
tests on 2005Q3–2007Q2. This rolling-window design ensures that predictions are always generated
out-of-sample, preventing look-ahead bias and capturing the time-varying nature of fund and market

characteristics.




                                                  39
                                 Figure 3. Performance Precision
This figure compares the distribution of model-based Weighted Average Precision with the Weighted Av-
erage Naive Precision. The vertical dashed lines indicate the mean values.




                                                 40
                            Figure 4. Performance Precision Over Time
This figure shows the distribution of Prediction Precision over time. The top Panel A reports the quarterly
distribution of weighted average precision from 1995Q1 to 2023Q1, while the bottom Panel B shows the
corresponding distribution for the naive benchmark. Each box plot summarizes the cross-sectional dis-
tribution of funds in a given quarter, with the dashed horizontal line representing the time-series mean.

                                                  Panel A




                                                  Panel B




                                                    41
                Figure 5. Performance Precision By Morningstar Style Category
This figure presents the distribution of Prediction Precision and the Naive Prediction Precision across
Morningstar fund style categories. Each panel shows a histogram of accuracy (x-axis) and fund counts
(y-axis) for Large, Mid, and Small funds split into Growth, Value, and Blend categories. Vertical dashed
lines denote the mean precision for each category.




                                                  42
                         Figure 6. Performance Precision By Fund Group
This figure plots the distribution of Prediction Precision across fund size groups. The x-axis reports
weighted average precision, while the y-axis shows the density of funds. Separate histograms are displayed
for Large, Mid, Small, and Other funds, with vertical dashed lines indicating the mean precision for each
group.




                                                   43
                   Figure 7. Performance Precision By Fund Group Over Time
This figure plots the evolution of Prediction Precision over time by fund size group. Funds are classified
each quarter into four categories: Large Funds, Mid Funds, Small Funds, and Other Funds. The y-axis
reports the average adjusted precision of predictions, while the x-axis denotes calendar time from 1995Q1
to 2023Q1.




                                                   44
                Figure 8. Performance Precision And Future Fund Performance
This figure illustrates the relationship between Prediction Precision and subsequent fund performance.
Funds are sorted into quintiles based on lagged weighted-average (WA) prediction precision, with Q1
denoting the lowest-precision quintile and Q5 the highest. The panels report average cumulative returns
over 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-quarter horizons following portfolio formation.




                                                  45
    Figure 9. Portfolio Returns of Correct vs. Incorrect Prediction Components of Funds
This Figure show returns of correct vs. incorrect prediction portions of funds. For each fund-quarter
observation, stocks held by each fund are classified into two portfolios: “Incorrect Predictions” portfolio
that contains stocks where the fund’s predicted direction was wrong, while “Correct Predictions”
contains stocks where the fund’s predicted direction was accurate. The upper panel displays cumulative
returns over time for two equal-weighted component portfolios. The lower panel quantifies the
performance differential between the two portfolios by displaying the cumulative gap, calculated as the
cumulative return of Incorrect Predictions minus Correct Predictions.




                                                    46
        Figure 10. Portfolio Returns of Stocks Sorted on Percent of Correct Prediction
This Figure show two complementary views of quintile portfolio performance based on fund
manager percent correct prediction. For each quarter, stocks are ranked by the average prediction
accuracy of all funds holding that stock and sorted into five equal-weighted portfolios. Quintile 1
(Q1) captures stocks where fund managers have the lowest percent correct prediction (i.e., funds
are least accurate in predicting these stocks’ return directions), while Quintile 5 (Q5) contains
stocks where fund managers demonstrate the highest percent correct prediction accuracy. The
top panel displays the cumulative returns over time for each quintile, showing the long-term per-
formance evolution of portfolios formed on prediction accuracy. The second panel shows the
cumulative return of Quintile 1 (Q1) minus Quintile 5 (Q5). The bottom panel shows the average
quarterly returns for each quintile with statistical significance indicators. Each bar displays the
mean quarterly return, with t-statistics and significance levels shown in parentheses below (***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10).




                                                47
        Figure 11. Portfolio Returns of Stocks Sorted on Percent of Correct Prediction
This Figure presents cumulative performance trajectories for quintile portfolios formed on funds’
Prediction Precision across the entire sample period, displayed across multiple risk-adjusted re-
turn specifications. For each quarter, stocks are ranked by the average prediction accuracy of
all funds holding that stock and sorted into five equal-weighted portfolios. Quintile 1 (Q1) cap-
tures stocks where fund managers are least accurate in predicting directional returns, while Quin-
tile 5 (Q5) contains stocks where fund managers demonstrate the highest prediction accuracy.
The figure displays four panels, each representing a different return metric: cumulative excess re-
turns, cumulative FF3 alpha (adjusting for market, size, and value factors), cumulative FF4 alpha
(adding momentum), and cumulative FF5 alpha (adding profitability and investment factors).




                                                48
                Table I. Summary Statistics – Morningstar Fund Characteristics
Panel A presents summary statistics on manager characteristics obtained from Morningstar. Manager
Ownership represents the average dollar ownership across all managers. Manager Tenure (Mean) and
Manager Tenure (Max) report, respectively, the average and maximum tenure of managers, measured
in quarters. Manager Funds is the average number of funds managed per manager. Manager Styles de-
notes the average number of distinct investment styles overseen by each manager. Panel B presents sum-
mary statistics on fund characteristics obtained from Morningstar. Fund Age is the number of quarters
since the inception of the fund. Within Category Competition measures the number of funds operating
within the same investment category as the focal fund in a given quarter. Within Management Company
Competition denotes the number of other funds managed by the same management company during the
quarter. Number of Managers is the count of individual portfolio managers responsible for managing
the fund. The unit of observations in both quarters are the fund-quarter.

                                  Panel A: Manager Characteristics
                                                  Mean     Std. Dev.     Min      Median        Max
Manager Ownership ($10,000)                       79.37      75.08      0.00      100.00      320.00
Manager Tenure (Mean)                             52.49      19.17      28.00      48.00       115.80
Manager Tenure (Max)                              61.25      28.16      28.00      53.00      155.00
Manager # Funds                                    2.83       4.35       1.00       2.00       29.00
Manager # Styles                                   2.00      2.06        1.00       1.00       12.00
Observations                                      53878

                             Panel B: Fund Characteristics
                                          Mean     Std. Dev.              Min     Median       Max
Fund Age                                  57.20       25.57              28.00    50.00       165.00
Within Category Competition               75.90       79.83               1.00     35.00      218.00
Within Management Company Competition      4.79       6.82                1.00     2.00       36.00
Number of Managers                         3.60        2.81               1.00     3.00        31.00
Observations                              53878




                                                 49
                    Table II. Summary Statistics – CRSP Fund Characteristics
This Table presents the summary statistics on manager characteristics obtained from CRSP. Prediction
Precision is the weighted average correct predictions of the direction of the subsequent quarter’s share
change generated by the model. Naive Prediction Precision is the weighted average correct predictions of
the direction of the subsequent quarter’s share change generated by the naive benchmark model. Total
Net Asset is the total market value of fund assets (in millions of dollars). Fund Flow is the net quarterly
flow into the fund. Income Yield is the annualized dividend yield of the fund. NAV/52 week high NAV
is the ratio of the current net asset value (NAV) to the highest NAV in the prior 52 weeks. Actual 12b1 is
the annual distribution (12b-1) fee charged by the fund. Management Fee is the annual management fee
charged by the fund. Expense Ratio is the ratio of total annual expenses to average net assets. Turnover
Ratio is the proportion of the fund’s portfolio replaced during the year. Open to Investment is an indicator
equal to one if the fund is open to new investors, and zero otherwise. Has Sales Restrictions is an indicator
equal to one if the fund imposes restrictions on sales, and zero otherwise.

                                                    Mean       Std. Dev.      Min      Median        Max
Prediction Precision                                 0.71        0.14         0.14      0.73         1.00
Naive Prediction Precision                           0.52        0.21         0.00      0.53         1.00
Total Net Asset                                     667.87      1391.91       0.30     178.50      8987.90
Fund Flow                                            5.29       108.74      -464.72     0.20        548.62
Income Yield                                         0.01        0.01         0.00      0.01         0.72
NAV/52 week high NAV                                 0.89        0.12         0.03      0.94         1.00
Actual 12b1                                          0.00        0.00         0.00      0.00         0.01
Management Fee                                       0.78        0.29         0.04      0.77         1.95
Expense Ratio                                        1.26        0.49         0.37      1.19         3.26
Turnover Ratio                                       0.71        0.85         0.03      0.46         5.84
Open to Investment                                   0.95        0.21         0.00      1.00         1.00
Has Sales Restrictions                               0.01        0.08         0.00      0.00         1.00
Observations                                        53489




                                                     50
                              Table III. Summary Statistics – Firm Level
This table reports summary statistics of firms. Position Size is the dollar value of a fund’s holding in a
given firm. Portfolio Position is the order of a fund’s holding of the firm within its overall portfolio, with
higher values indicating smaller relative positions. Market Equity is the market value of the firm’s equity
(in millions of dollars). #Funds Position Held In is the number of distinct funds that hold a position in the
firm in a given quarter. Firm Age is the number of months since the firm’s first appearance in CRSP. Total
Debt/ME is the ratio of total debt to market equity. Asset Turnover is sales divided by total assets. Sales
scaled/BE is sales scaled by book equity. R&D/Sales is research and development expenditures scaled by
sales. Gross Proﬁt/ME is gross profits scaled by market equity. Free Cash Flow/ME is free cash flow scaled
by market equity. Book Equity/ME is the ratio of book equity to market equity. Net Equity Payout/ME is
net equity payouts (repurchases minus issuances plus dividends) scaled by market equity. Earnings Sur-
prise is the difference between reported quarterly earnings and the most recent consensus analyst forecast,
scaled by the stock price. Short Term Reversal is the past one-month stock return (negative values indi-
cate recent losers). Momentum 1–6 Months is the cumulative stock return from months 1 through 6 prior
to portfolio formation. Momentum 1–12 Months is the cumulative stock return from months 1 through
12 prior to portfolio formation. CAPM Idiosyncratic Vol. is the standard deviation of residuals from a
CAPM regression estimated over the prior 36 months. The unit of observations is fund-firm–quarter.




                                                      51
                      Table III. Summary Statistics – Firm Level (continued)

                           Panel A: Fund-Firm Holding Characteristics
                                                Mean      Std. Dev.   Min       Median      Max
Portfolio Position Size                        5.8e+06    3.0e+07     0.00       0.00     4.2e+09
Portfolio Position                               43.70      24.15     1.00      42.00      100.00
Observations                                   5434702

                           Panel B: Firm Fundamental Characteristics
                                                Mean      Std. Dev.     Min     Median      Max
Market Equity                                  29988.67   84275.90     0.00     6118.08   2.5e+06
#Funds Position Held In                          55.89      46.09       1.00    44.00      263.00
Firm Age                                        400.25     268.23      0.00     322.00    1150.00
Total Debt/ME                                    0.48        0.97      0.00      0.19       6.95
Asset Turnover                                    1.25     420.98      0.00      0.69     4.6e+05
Sales scaled/BE                                  2.08        2.71      0.09       1.31      18.93
R&D/Sales                                         0.12       0.31      0.00      0.04        2.55
Gross Profit/ME                                  0.30        0.22      -0.14     0.26        1.02
Free Cash Flow/ME                                0.04        0.11      -0.48     0.04       0.46
Book Equity/ME                                   0.52       0.44       0.02      0.39        2.58
Net Equity Payout/ME                             0.04        0.05      0.00      0.03       0.27
Earnings Surprise                                0.20        9.88     -271.69    0.17     3463.89
Observations                                   5434702

                               Panel C: Firm Return Characteristics
                                                Mean      Std. Dev.   Min       Median      Max
Short Term Reversal                             0.02        0.14      -1.00      0.01      17.60
Momentum 1-6 Months                             0.08        7.62      -1.00      0.05     8899.00
Momentum 1-12 Months                             0.17       1.64      -1.00      0.11     1259.00
CAPM Idiosyncratic Vol.                         0.02        0.02      0.00       0.02      14.22
Observations                                   4807535




                                               52
                    Table IV. Manager Characteristics and Prediction Precision
This table shows the relationship between Manager Characteristics and Prediction Precision at the fund
level. Manager Ownership (in $10000) is the average dollar ownership of fund managers in the corre-
sponding fund. Manager Tenure (Max) is the maximum tenure, measured in quarters, among all man-
agers of a given fund, while Manager Tenure (Mean) is the average tenure across managers. Manager
#Funds is the average number of funds simultaneously managed by a given manager. Manager #Styles
is the average number of distinct investment styles overseen by each manager. Prediction Precision is the
fraction of correct predictions produced by the model at the fund level. Quarter-Year FE and Fund FE
indicate the inclusion of quarter-year fixed effects and fund fixed effects, respectively. Standard errors are
clustered at the fund level. Robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                    (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)
VARIABLES                                                    Prediction Precision

Manager Ownership               -0.0003***
                                  (10.131)
Manager Tenure (Max)                             0.0007***
                                                  (4.253)
Manager Tenure (Mean)                                             0.0006***
                                                                   (9.296)
Manager #Funds                                                                      0.0007***
                                                                                     (3.424)
Manager #Styles                                                                                    0.0023***
                                                                                                    (4.629)
Constant                         0.6328***       0.6651***         0.6523***        0.6587***      0.6572***
                                 (111.445)       (320.586)         (338.059)        (387.955)      (382.550)

Observations                      16,208           53,878           53,878           53,878          53,878
R-squared                          0.723           0.673            0.673            0.673           0.673
Quarter-Year FE                    YES              YES              YES              YES             YES
Fund FE                            YES              YES              YES              YES             YES




                                                      53
                       Table V. Fund Characteristics and Prediction Precision
This table shows the relationship between Fund Characteristics and Prediction Precision at the fund level.
Fund Age is the number of quarters since the fund’s inception. Within Category Competition measures
the number of other funds operating within the same Morningstar investment category as the focal fund
in a given quarter. Within Management Company Competition denotes the number of other funds man-
aged by the same management company during the quarter. Number of Managers is the count of individ-
ual portfolio managers responsible for managing the fund. Prediction Precision is the fraction of correct
predictions produced by the model at the fund level. Quarter-Year FE and Fund FE indicate the inclu-
sion of quarter fixed effects and fund fixed effects, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter
level. Robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                            (1)         (2)           (3)               (4)
VARIABLES                                                              Prediction Precision

Fund Age                                              0.0013***
                                                      (61.440)
Within Category Competition                                          -0.0001***
                                                                       (3.058)
Within Management Company Competition                                               -0.0023***
                                                                                      (3.260)
Number of Managers                                                                                  -0.0014***
                                                                                                      (2.705)
Constant                                              0.6788***       0.6531***      0.6471***       0.6592***
                                                      (471.378)      (500.897)       (419.093)       (388.559)

Observations                                            53,878         52,536         40,803          53,878
R-squared                                               0.673          0.671          0.672           0.673
Quarter-Year FE                                          YES            YES            YES             YES
Fund FE                                                  YES            YES            YES             YES




                                                       54
                              Table VI. Fund Characteristics and Prediction Precision - Fund CRSP Characteristics
     This table shows the relationship between Fund CRSP Characteristics and Prediction Precision at the fund level. Total Net Asset is the total market
     value of the fund’s assets (in millions of dollars). Fund Flow is the net quarterly flow into the fund, scaled by total net assets. Actual 12b1 is the
     annual distribution (12b-1) fee charged by the fund. Management Fee is the annual management fee charged by the fund. Expense Ratio is the
     ratio of total annual expenses to average net assets. Turnover Ratio is the proportion of the fund’s portfolio replaced during the year. Open to
     Investment is an indicator equal to one if the fund is open to new investors, and zero otherwise. Has Sales Restrictions is an indicator equal to
     one if the fund imposes restrictions on sales (e.g., minimum holding period or redemption fees), and zero otherwise. Prediction Precision is the
     fraction of correct predictions produced by the model at the fund level. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level. Robust t-statistics are
     reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
55
                       Table VI. Fund Characteristics and Prediction Precision - Fund CRSP Characteristics (continued)


                                    (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)               (5)         (6)          (7)
     VARIABLES                                                             Prediction Precision
     Total Net Asset             -2.1384***
                                   (4.812)
     Turnover Ratio                            -0.0149***
                                                 (9.712)
     Fund Flow                                                 -4.5290**
                                                                (2.182)
     Management Fee                                                            -0.0078**
                                                                                (2.603)
     Expense Ratio                                                                                -0.0046
                                                                                                   (1.432)
56




     Open to Investment                                                                                       -0.0060***
                                                                                                                (2.748)
     Has Sales Restrictions                                                                                                0.0578***
                                                                                                                            (4.874)
     Constant                    0.6612***      0.6737***      0.6620***       0.6709***          0.6678***   0.5908***    0.6472***
                                 (403.580)      (337.763)      (410.220)       (175.306)          (137.071)   (134.766)    (326.832)

     Observations                 50,983         46,043         50,962           45,864            46,231       48,177      46,527
     R-squared                    0.665          0.684          0.664            0.686             0.682        0.686       0.697
     Year FE                       YES            YES            YES              YES               YES          YES         YES
     Fund FE                       YES            YES            YES              YES               YES          YES         YES
                     Table VII. Prediction Precision and Firm Characteristics
This table shows the relationship between Firm Characteristics and Prediction Precision at the firm level.
Portfolio Position is the position of the security’s market value within the fund’s portfolio, with higher
values indicating lower relative holdings. Market Equity is the market value of the firm’s equity (in mil-
lions of dollars). # Funds Position Held In is the number of distinct funds holding the security in a given
quarter. Firm Age is the number of months since the firm’s first appearance in CRSP. Prediction Preci-
sion is the fraction of correct predictions produced by the model at the security level. Quarter-Year FE
indicate the inclusion of quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the firm level and
quarter level. Robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                        (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)
VARIABLES                                                     Prediction Precision

Portfolio Position                  0.0020***
                                     (52.407)
Market Equity                                           -0.0000***
                                                          (3.375)
#Funds Position Held In                                                      -0.0002***
                                                                               (4.659)
Firm Age                                                                                         0.0000***
                                                                                                   (5.114)
Constant                           -0.3202***             -0.2566***         -0.2563***          -0.2677***
                                    (62.793)               (52.432)           (50.564)            (50.839)

Observations                        5,958,755             5,316,273           5,958,755           5,327,875
R-squared                             0.253                 0.252               0.244               0.252
Quarter-Year FE                        YES                   YES                 YES                 YES




                                                     57
                                             Table VIII. Prediction Precision and Security Characteristics
     This table shows the relationship between Firm Fundamental Characteristics and Prediction Precision at the security level. Total Debt/ME is the
     ratio of total debt to market equity. Asset Turnover is the ratio of sales to total assets. Sales scaled/BE is sales scaled by book equity. R&D/Sales
     is research and development expenditures scaled by sales. Gross Proﬁt/ME is gross profits scaled by market equity. Free Cash Flow/ME is free
     cash flow scaled by market equity. Book Equity/ME is the ratio of book equity to market equity. Net Equity Payout/ME is net equity payouts
     (repurchases minus issuances plus dividends) scaled by market equity. Earnings Surprise is the difference between reported quarterly earnings
     and the most recent consensus analyst forecast, scaled by the stock price. Prediction Precision is the fraction of correct predictions produced by
     the model at the security level. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the firm and quarter level. Robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
     ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
58
                                Table VIII. Prediction Precision and Security Characteristics (continued)

                               (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
     VARIABLES                                                            Prediction Precision

     Total Debt/ME          0.0083***
                             (4.739)
     Asset Turnover                     -0.0000***
                                         (66.758)
     Sales/BE                                        0.0002
                                                     (0.581)
     R&D/Sales                                                   -0.0092***
                                                                   (2.668)
     Gross Profit/ME                                                             0.0005
                                                                                 (0.110)
59




     Free Cash Flow/ME                                                                      0.0235***
                                                                                             (3.373)
     Book Equity/ME                                                                                     0.0365***
                                                                                                         (16.053)
     Net Equity Payout/ME                                                                                           0.2564***
                                                                                                                     (16.216)
     Earnings Surprise                                                                                                          -0.0002**
                                                                                                                                  (1.992)
     Constant               0.1305***   0.1349***    0.1327***   0.1365***      0.1348***   0.1319***   0.1198***   0.1257***    0.1303***
                            (50.853)    (52.026)     (48.556)    (40.811)       (44.928)    (50.260)    (42.654)    (46.769)     (49.185)

     Observations           5,323,840   5,320,129    5,188,708   2,995,288      5,318,193   5,234,659   5,209,346   4,983,976   5,119,510
     R-squared                0.223       0.223        0.223       0.223          0.223       0.223       0.224       0.223      0.224
     Quarter-Year FE           YES         YES          YES         YES           YES          YES         YES         YES        YES
                 Table IX. Prediction Precision and Firms Return Characteristics
This table shows the relationship between Firm Return Characteristics and Prediction Precision at the
security level. Past 1 Month Return is the past one-month stock return (negative values indicate recent
losers). Momentum 1–6 Months is the cumulative stock return from months 1 through 6 prior to port-
folio formation. Momentum 1–12 Months is the cumulative stock return from months 1 through 12 prior
to portfolio formation. CAPM Idiosyncratic Vol. is the standard deviation of residuals from a CAPM
regression estimated over the prior 36 months. Prediction Precision is the fraction of correct predictions
produced by the model at the security level. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the firm and quarter
level. Robust t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                           (1)                 (2)                (3)                   (4)
VARIABLES                                                      Prediction Precision

Past 1 Month Return                   -0.0239***
                                        (3.089)
Momentum 1-6 Months                                         -0.0000
                                                             (0.928)
Momentum 1-12 Months                                                             -0.0019
                                                                                  (1.341)
CAPM Idiosyncratic Vol.                                                                               0.1857*
                                                                                                      (1.722)
Constant                               0.1354***            0.1345***           0.1349***            0.1312***
                                       (51.770)              (51.528)           (50.869)             (36.589)

Observations                           5,286,960            5,257,523            5,213,302           5,248,059
R-squared                                 0.223               0.223                0.224               0.224
Quarter-Year FE                           YES                  YES                  YES                 YES




                                                      60
                   Table X. Prediction Precision and Future Fund Performance
This table shows the relationship between Prediction Precision and subsequent fund performance. The
sample is sorted into quintiles based on predicted precision, and future fund returns are reported for
each quintile. CRET0,1 through CRET0,4 denote cumulative excess fund returns, computed as the fund
returns minus the average returns of all funds within the same Morningstar category, over horizons of
one to four quarters ahead, respectively. The column labeled Q1–Q5 reports the difference in returns
between the lowest-precision quintile (Q1) and the highest-precision quintile (Q5). t-statistics are shown
in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                     Q1               Q2             Q3             Q4              Q5            Q1–Q5
CRET[0,1]          0.14**            0.06           0.06           -0.04          -0.09            0.23**
                   (2.05)           (0.82)         (1.12)         (0.64)           (1.52)          (2.13)
CRET[0,2]          0.25***            0.13          0.12           -0.05         -0.22**          0.47***
                   (2.58)            (1.31)        (1.22)         (0.56)          (2.07)           (2.87)
CRET[0,3]          0.33***           0.21*          0.17           -0.02         -0.31**          0.64***
                    (3.18)          (1.76)         (1.39)         (0.21)          (2.47)           (3.34)
CRET[0,4]          0.36***          0.34**         0.18*            0.06         -0.42**          0.79***
                   (2.88)           (2.31)         (1.66)         (0.44)          (2.36)           (3.05)




                                                    61
                   Table XI. Prediction Precision and Future Fund Performance
This table shows the relationship between Prediction Precision and subsequent fund performance. The
sample is sorted into quintiles based on predicted precision, and future fund excess 4-quarter cumula-
tive returns, and 4-quarter cumulative factor alphas. FF3 includes Mkt–RF, SMB, HML; FF4 includes
Mkt–RF, SMB, HML, MOM; and FF5 includes Mkt–RF, SMB, HML, RMW, CMA. The column la-
beled Q1–Q5 reports the difference in returns between the lowest-precision quintile (Q1) and the highest-
precision quintile (Q5). t-statistics are shown in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                         Q1              Q2             Q3             Q4             Q5            Q1–Q5
Excess Return         0.365***         0.319**         0.156          0.035        -0.449**         0.815***
                       (2.86)           (2.15)        (1.43)         (0.26)         (2.49)           (3.05)
FF3 Alpha             0.374***         0.285*          0.185          0.091        -0.439**         0.812***
                       (2.80)           (1.85)        (1.62)         (0.64)          (2.33)          (2.85)
FF4 Alpha             0.308**          0.313*        0.281**          0.119        -0.475**         0.783***
                       (2.24)           (1.95)        (2.45)         (0.80)         (2.43)           (2.66)
FF5 Alpha             0.370***          0.105        0.249**         0.079         -0.409**         0.779**
                       (2.58)          (0.66)         (2.04)          (0.51)        (2.03)           (2.53)




                                                     62
     Table XII. Portfolio Returns of Incorrect vs. Correct Predictions of Fund Portfolios
This Table reports the performance comparison between two components of fund portfolios based on
prediction accuracy at the stock level. For each fund-quarter observation, stocks held by each fund are
classified into two portfolios: "Harder to Predict" portfolio that contains stocks where the fund’s pre-
dicted direction was wrong, while "Easier to Predict" contains stocks where the fund’s predicted di-
rection was accurate. The estimates of the returns and alphas are annualized by multiplying by four.
The table presents mean annualized returns, excess returns, factor alphas, and t-statistics. FF3 includes
Mkt–RF, SMB, HML; FF4 includes Mkt–RF, SMB, HML, MOM; and FF5 includes Mkt–RF, SMB,
HML, RMW, CMA. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                             Harder to Predict                Easier to Predict              Difference
Return                           7.981***                         7.069***                    0.912***
                                  (61.59)                          (54.62)                     (12.41)
Excess Return                   6.490***                           5.579***                   0.912***
                                 (49.92)                           (42.92)                     (12.41)
FF3 Alpha                        1.897***                         0.800***                    1.097***
                                  (17.12)                           (7.44)                     (14.37)
FF4 Alpha                        2.177***                          1.276***                   0.902***
                                  (19.29)                           (11.68)                    (11.60)
FF5 Alpha                       0.624***                          -0.459***                   1.083***
                                   (5.21)                            (3.95)                    (13.03)




                                                   63
         Table XIII. Portfolio Returns of Stocks Sorted on Percent of Correct Prediction
This Table reports the performance of quintile stock portfolios formed on stocks’ percent of correct di-
rectional prediction by fund managers that held that stock. Each quarter, stocks are ranked by the average
prediction accuracy of all funds holding that stock and sorted into five equal-weighted portfolios. Quin-
tile 1 (Q1) captures stocks where, on average, the behavior of fund managers are least predictable, while
Quintile 5 (Q5) contains stocks where, on average, the behavior of fund managers are most predictable.
The Q1–Q5 column presents the quarterly performance differential between the lowest and highest accu-
racy quintiles. The estimates of the returns and alphas are annualized by multiplying by four. FF3 includes
Mkt–RF, SMB, HML; FF4 includes Mkt–RF, SMB, HML, MOM; and FF5 includes Mkt–RF, SMB,
HML, RMW, CMA. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                         Q1            Q2             Q3            Q4              Q5          Q1–Q5
                     (Lowest)                                                   (Highest)
Return               8.707***       7.884***       6.745***       5.765***       4.467*         4.240***
                       (3.85)        (3.79)          (3.17)        (2.61)         (1.73)        (5.74)
Excess Return        6.476***       5.653***        4.513**         3.533         2.236         4.240***
                       (2.85)        (2.70)          (2.11)        (1.59)        (0.86)         (5.74)
FF3                    2.689          1.803          0.526         -0.543         -1.736        4.425***
                       (1.53)         (1.12)         (0.33)        (0.33)         (0.85)        (6.08)
FF4                   3.254*         2.524           1.686         0.392         -0.303         3.557***
                       (1.78)         (1.52)         (1.03)        (0.23)         (0.15)        (5.12)
FF5                     1.753        0.706          -0.446         -1.842         -2.109        3.862***
                      (0.92)         (0.41)         (0.26)         (1.03)         (0.95)        (4.96)




                                                    64
                         Table XIV. Prediction Precision and Active Shares
This Table reports Fama-Macbeth regression results examining the relationship between mutual fund
managers’ trade predictability and subsequent abnormal returns, measured as cumulatively quarter 0
through quarter 4. Active Share is defined in Cremers and Petajisto’s (2009) as the fraction of a mutual
fund’s portfolio holdings that differ from its benchmark index. Standard errors are adjusted following
the Newey-West procedure to account for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity. t-statistics are shown
in parentheses below coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.

                                            (1)                          (2)                          (3)
VARIABLES                                                            CRET[0,4]
Prediction Precision                      -0.8554**                   -1.0074**                     -1.0261***
                                           (2.06)                      (2.38)                       (2.70)
Active Share                                                          0.0041***                     0.0032***
                                                                        (5.13)                       (4.57)
RET[−1,0]                                                                                            0.1311**
                                                                                                    (2.09)
CRET[−4,0]                                                                                          0.0628**
                                                                                                     (2.12)
Cons                                      0.6736**                     0.5527**                     0.5648**
                                          (2.39)                       (2.01)                        (2.25)
Observations                               40585                        40585                       40585
R-squared                                 0.00533                      0.00854                      0.106




                                                      65
Appendix for
“Mimicking Finance”




        66
A   Variable Descriptions


Variable                    Description
Actual 12b1                 Annual distribution (12b-1) fee charged by the fund.
Asset Turnover              Ratio of sales to total assets.
Book Equity/ME              Ratio of book equity to market equity.
CAPM Idiosyncratic Vol.     Standard deviation of residuals from a CAPM regression estimated
                            over the prior 36 months.
CRET0,1                     Cumulative excess fund return one quarter ahead.
CRET0,2                     Cumulative excess fund return two quarters ahead.
CRET0,3                     Cumulative excess fund return three quarters ahead.
CRET0,4                     Cumulative excess fund return four quarters ahead.
Earnings Surprise           Difference between reported quarterly earnings and the most recent
                            consensus analyst forecast, scaled by stock price.
Expense Ratio               Ratio of total annual expenses to average net assets.
Firm Age                    Number of months since the firm’s first appearance in CRSP.
Free Cash Flow/ME           Free cash flow scaled by market equity.
Fund Age                    Number of quarters since the fund’s inception.
Fund Flow                   Net quarterly flow into the fund, scaled by total net assets.
Gross Proﬁt/ME              Gross profits scaled by market equity.
Has Sales Restrictions      Indicator equal to one if the fund imposes restrictions on sales (e.g.,
                            redemption fees), zero otherwise.
Income Yield                Annualized dividend yield of the fund.
Management Fee              Annual management fee charged by the fund.
Manager # Funds             Average number of funds simultaneously managed by a given man-
                            ager.
Manager # Styles            Average number of distinct investment styles overseen by a manager.
Manager Ownership           Average dollar ownership of fund managers in the corresponding
                            fund.
Manager Tenure (Max)        Maximum tenure, measured in quarters, among all managers of a
                            given fund.
Manager Tenure (Mean)       Average tenure of managers in a given fund, measured in quarters.
Market Equity               Market value of the firm’s equity (in millions of dollars).
Momentum 1–6 Months         Cumulative stock return from months 1 through 6 prior to portfolio
                            formation.
Momentum 1–12 Months        Cumulative stock return from months 1 through 12 prior to portfolio
                            formation.
MV Rank                     Rank of a security’s market value within a fund’s portfolio; higher val-
                            ues indicate larger relative positions.


                                           67
Variable                 Description
                         Fraction of correct predictions from a naive benchmark model.
Naive Prediction Precision
NAV/52 week high NAV     Ratio of the current net asset value (NAV) to the highest NAV in the
                         prior 52 weeks.
Net Equity Payout/ME     Net equity payouts (repurchases minus issuances plus dividends)
                         scaled by market equity.
Number Funds             Number of distinct funds holding the security in a given quarter.
Number of Managers       Count of individual portfolio managers responsible for managing the
                         fund.
Open to Investment       Indicator equal to one if the fund is open to new investors, zero oth-
                         erwise.
Prediction Precision     Fraction of correct predictions produced by the model (fund or secu-
                         rity level).
R&D/Sales                Research and development expenditures scaled by sales.
Sales scaled/BE          Sales scaled by book equity.
Short Term Reversal      Past one-month stock return (negative values indicate recent losers).
Total Debt/ME            Ratio of total debt to market equity.
Total Net Asset          Total market value of a fund’s assets (in millions of dollars).
Turnover Ratio           Proportion of a fund’s portfolio replaced during the year.
Within Category Competi- Number of other funds operating in the same Morningstar invest-
tion                     ment category in a given quarter.
Within Management Com- Number of other funds managed by the same management company
pany Competition         during the quarter.




                                              68
Variable                          Description
Fund-level signals
Lagged Fund Returns               Prior-quarter and multi-quarter returns of the fund portfolio.
Lagged Fund Flows                 Net cash inflow/outflow at the fund level, aggregated to the quarter.
Lagged Fund Characteristics       Size (e.g., AUM), value tilt, and momentum tilt of the fund, con-
                                  structed from holdings or reported style metrics.
Security-level signals
Lagged Security Characteristics   Equity size (e.g., log market capitalization), value (e.g., B/M ratio),
                                  and momentum (past returns over standard lookbacks).
Risk/Factor Exposures             Predictors from a curated factor list (market, size, value, profitability,
                                  investment, short-term reversal), merged at the permno–month level
                                  and aligned to quarters.
Peer/Category behavior
Category Activity Rates           Share-increase, share-decrease, and no-change rates for the fund’s
                                  Morningstar category (plus their lags), summarizing peer managers’
                                  trading behavior within the style bucket.
Macroeconomic backdrop
Lagged Macroeconomic Factors Level and slope of the yield curve and credit conditions, includ-
                             ing term spreads (e.g., 5y–1y, 10y–3m), default spreads (e.g., BAA–
                             Treasury), and related short/long yields (real and nominal).
Position & within-fund context
Market Value and Shares      Current market value (mv ) and lagged shares (sh) up to six quarters.
Weight Dynamics              Lagged and pass-through values used to compute portfolio weight
                             changes.
Rank Inside Fund (id)        Size rank of the security within the fund each quarter (1 = largest).
Padding Indicator (mask)     Flags placeholder rows created to keep the panel rectangular.




                                                  69
B     Theoretical Framework: Extension

B.1    Additional Predictions on Predictability

Let Predi denote the predictability of fund i’s trades by the AI model. In the model,

                                              ∂Predi
                                                     < 0,
                                               ∂ei
because non-routine effort ei generates novel trades not captured by historical patterns. We now
derive additional predictions linking predictability to fund and manager characteristics.
Prediction 1 (Fund Size and Predictability). Larger funds possess more resources, specialized teams,
and access to superior information and technology. In the model, this increases the effective eﬃciency
of non-routine effort:
                                                           ∂zt
                                      zt = zt (S),             > 0.
                                                           ∂S
Since e∗t is increasing in zt , we obtain

                                    ∂e∗t                  ∂Predi
                                         >0     ⇒                < 0.
                                    ∂S                     ∂S
Larger funds exert more non-routine effort and exhibit less predictable trading.
Prediction 2 (Manager Tenure and Predictability). Early-career managers face strong career con-
cerns and signaling incentives. Let the marginal beneﬁt of effort decline with tenure τ ,

                                            ∂M B(et )
                                                      < 0,
                                              ∂τ
where tenure can be interpreted as a reduced-form shifter to the payoff from alpha (e.g., declining
career concerns or reputation incentives). In equilibrium,

                                    ∂e∗t                  ∂Predi
                                         <0     ⇒                > 0.
                                    ∂τ                     ∂τ

    Younger managers trade less predictably, long-tenured managers trade more predictably.
Prediction 3 (Fund Competition and Predictability). Let κ denote the intensity of competition
among active funds. Higher competition increases the value of differentiation, raising the effective
payoff to alpha:
                                                          e      ∂B
                             Ut (e) = B(κ) αt (e) −          ,      > 0.
                                                          zt     ∂κ

                                                     70
Then,
                               ∂e∗t                ∂Predi
                                    >0 ⇒                    < 0.
                               ∂κ                    ∂κ
Funds in more competitive segments exhibit lower predictability and more novel trading.

Prediction 4 (Manager Ownership and Predictability). Let ω measure the strength of performance-
based incentives (manager ownership, incentive fees). Manager utility becomes:
                                                                  e
                                          Ut (e) = ω αt (e) −        .
                                                                  zt
Since e∗t increases in ω,
                              ∂e∗t                 ∂Predi
                                   >0 ⇒                     < 0.
                              ∂ω                     ∂ω
Managers with higher ownership stake trade less predictably and produce more novel alpha.

Prediction 5 (Number of Managers and Predictability). A larger management team can bring
complementary skills, broader networks, and more diverse information sources. In the model, this
raises the effective eﬃciency or productivity of non-routine effort:

                                          ∂zt                      ∂kt
                   zt = zt (M ),              > 0 or kt = kt (M ),     > 0.
                                          ∂M                       ∂M
Since e∗t is increasing in both zt and kt , we have

                                   ∂e∗t                    ∂Predi
                                        >0        ⇒               < 0.
                                   ∂M                       ∂M
Funds with more managers allocate more effort to non-routine, judgment-intensive activities and
therefore have less predictable trades.


B.2     Social Welfare with Information Production Externalities

So far, welfare has been measured at the fund level: managers generate alpha for their own in-
vestors. However, active managers also produce information that improves price efficiency and
benefits all market participants. We now extend the analysis to incorporate such information-
production externalities.

   Let ϕ(et ) denote the contribution of a type-t manager’s non-routine effort et to market-wide
information production (or price efficiency). Assume:

                                    ϕ′ (et ) > 0,          ϕ′′ (et ) ≤ 0,

                                                      71
so that additional non-routine effort raises, but at a decreasing rate, the informativeness of prices.

   Let Ψ(·) be the aggregate benefit of information production for the economy, with

                                   Ψ′ (x) > 0,           Ψ′′ (x) ≤ 0.

Total information production is

                                  I = λϕ(e∗H ) + (1 − λ)ϕ(e∗L ),

where λ is the fraction of high-skill managers.

   Define social welfare as:
                                    W Social = W Total + Ψ(I),

where W Total is the total private welfare derived earlier (sum of managers’ utilities and investors’
net alpha).

Proposition 3 (AI and Social Welfare with Information Externalities). The introduction of AI-
based decomposition increases social welfare:

                                         Social     Social
                                        WPost-AI > WPre-AI .

Proof. From the post-AI separating equilibrium we know:

                                      ePost-AI
                                       t       > ePre-AI
                                                  t      ,    ∀t,

since pre-AI pooling suppresses non-routine effort. Let total private welfare be defined as
                                             X
                                 W Total ≡
                                                                    
                                                     ϕ(et ) − c(et ) ,
                                                t

where ϕ(·) is increasing and c(·) is increasing and convex. Define g(e) ≡ ϕ(e) − c(e). Under
these assumptions, g is increasing over the equilibrium effort range. Therefore,

                                   g(ePost-AI
                                      t       ) > g(ePre-AI
                                                     t      ) ∀t,

which implies
                                         Total      Total
                                        WPost-AI > WPre-AI .



                                                    72
   Thus
                         ϕ(ePost-AI
                            t       ) > ϕ(ePre-AI
                                           t      ),    ⇒       IPost-AI > IPre-AI .

Because Ψ′ (·) > 0, we have
                                       Ψ(IPost-AI ) > Ψ(IPre-AI ).

Combining the increase in total private welfare with the increase in information externalities
yields
                 Social     Total                     Total                   Social
                WPost-AI = WPost-AI + Ψ(IPost-AI ) > WPre-AI + Ψ(IPre-AI ) = WPre-AI .



Interpretation. AI-based decomposition not only improves the allocation of effort inside funds,
it also increases market-wide information production by encouraging non-routine analysis. This
improves price efficiency and social welfare beyond the gains captured by fund investors alone.
This said, fee-adjustments by managers could partially (to completely) offset this if adopted.


B.3      Welfare Under Heterogeneous Fund Investors

We now allow for heterogeneity among fund investors. Suppose there are two types of investors,
and their types are not perfectly observable:

      • Type-A investors, who can interpret the AI-based decomposition and condition capital flows
       and fees on non-routine performance.

      • Type-B investors, who cannot fully process the AI signal and continue to respond primarily
       to coarse activity measures.

   Let µ ∈ [0, 1] be the mass of type-A investors and (1 − µ) the mass of type-B investors.
Let wtA and wtB denote equilibrium compensation for a type-t manager from type-A and type-B
investors, respectively. Total compensation is:

                                      wt = µwtA + (1 − µ)wtB .

   Type-A investors use the AI signal Ñ = θtN et and thus implement the separating wage sched-
ule
                                             wtA = αt (e∗t ),

                                                   73
as in the baseline post-AI analysis. Type-B investors base compensation on coarser observable
statistics, e.g., partial use of T or historical performance, and may not achieve full separation.

   Define investor-specific welfare:

                       W I,A = µ α − wA ,         W I,B = (1 − µ) α − wB ,
                                                                       


and manager welfare as before:
                                                 X
                                        WM =           πt Ut∗ ,
                                                   t

where πt is the population share of type t.

   Total welfare is:
                                 W Het = W I,A + W I,B + W M .

Proposition 4 (Heterogeneous Investors and Welfare). As µ increases (a larger share of sophis-
ticated, AI-using investors), the economy converges to the benchmark post-AI separating allocation
and total welfare increases:
                                            ∂W Het
                                                   > 0.
                                             ∂µ

Proof. As µ rises, a greater fraction of capital is allocated by investors who correctly interpret Ñ
and implement the separating wage schedule. This increases incentives for non-routine effort,
pushing et toward the post-AI benchmark e∗t .

   Manager utilities Ut increase because effort moves closer to the privately optimal level, and
aggregate alpha becomes more strongly tied to skill. Type-A investor welfare is by construction
maximized under correct pricing of skill; as µ rises, the mispricing distortions associated with
type-B investors shrink in measure.

   Thus total welfare rises monotonically in µ and converges to the post-AI benchmark when
µ → 1.

Interpretation. The benefits of AI-based decomposition are strongest when investors can un-
derstand and act on the information it provides. Heterogeneity in investor sophistication leads
to an intermediate regime between pure pre-AI pooling and full post-AI separation.




                                                 74
B.4      Comparative Statics of Welfare

We now summarize how welfare responds to key technological and preference parameters: the
routine-task weight a, the CES parameter ρ, effort efficiency zt , and non-routine productivity
θtN .

    Recall that welfare for type t is:

                                                  1/ρ       e∗t
                     Wt∗ = A [C0 + kt (e∗t )ρ ]         −       ,   kt = (1 − a)(θtN )ρ .
                                                            zt

Effect of a (Importance of Routine Tasks)

As a increases, routine tasks receive more weight in the CES aggregator:

                                         kt = (1 − a)(θtN )ρ ↓ .

This reduces the marginal return to non-routine effort, leading to lower e∗t and lower welfare Wt∗ .

Prediction 6 (Routine Weight and Welfare). Welfare is decreasing in the routine task weight a:

                                                  ∂Wt∗
                                                       < 0.
                                                   ∂a
Environments where routine tasks dominate (high a) are less conducive to welfare-improving non-
routine analysis.


Effect of ρ (Elasticity of Substitution)

The parameter ρ determines the elasticity of substitution σ = 1/(1 − ρ) between routine and
non-routine tasks.

    • When ρ is higher (tasks more easily substitutable), routine input can more easily replace
        non-routine input, weakening incentives to exert non-routine effort.

    • When ρ is lower (tasks more complementary), non-routine input is more valuable at the
        margin, raising e∗t and Wt∗ .




                                                        75
Prediction 7 (Complementarity and Welfare). Welfare is higher when routine and non-routine
tasks are stronger complements:
                                              ∂Wt∗
                                                   < 0.
                                               ∂ρ
Lower ρ (stronger complementarity) increases the value of non-routine effort and raises welfare.


Effect of zt (Effort Efficiency)

Effort efficiency zt measures how costly it is for type t to supply non-routine effort.
Prediction 8 (Effort Efficiency and Welfare). Welfare is increasing in zt :

                                              ∂Wt∗
                                                   > 0.
                                               ∂zt
Higher zt reduces the marginal cost of effort, raises optimal effort e∗t , and increases both alpha and
manager utility.


Effect of θtN (Non-Routine Productivity)

Non-routine productivity θtN determines how effectively a manager converts effort into non-
routine input N = θtN e.

   Since
                                         kt = (1 − a)(θtN )ρ

and e∗t is increasing in kt , alpha and welfare both increase in θtN .
Prediction 9 (Non-Routine Productivity and Welfare). Welfare is increasing in non-routine
productivity:
                                              ∂Wt∗
                                                   > 0.
                                              ∂θtN
Managers who are more productive at non-routine tasks generate higher alpha and greater welfare.

Summary. Welfare is higher when:

   • routine tasks are less important (a is low),

   • routine and non-routine tasks are more complementary (low ρ),

   • managers are more efficient in exerting effort (high zt ),

                                                   76
   • and more productive in non-routine tasks (high θtN ).

These comparative statics provide clear empirical guidance on where AI-based decomposition is
likely to yield the largest welfare gains.




                                              77
